ACAMS™

CGSS

STUDY GUIDE

Version 1.531

  

acams.org
ACAMS Product Staff

Steven Oxman, CAMS

Nicole Ackerman, CAMS

Amanda J. Dominique

Michelle Rance, CAMS

Yuen Cho Man, CAMS

Shannon Field

Contributors

Eric Solecki

Mark Hayes

Marco Tham, CAMS
Heather Carroll
Crystal Ferguson

Astrid Rouleau

ACAMS™®

Edith Velasquez
Ronald Myers
Poon Ho Yi
Lenz Bayas
Adam Cochran

Todd Beck, CAMS

We would like to thank the following individuals for their significant contribution in the development of
the CGSS Examination and Study Guide through the work of the CGSS Examination Task Force:

Adrian Ford
Abubakr Ebrahim, CAMS
Ahmed El Buckley
Alisa-May Meepummarin
Andrew McAdams, CAMS
Andris Nikitins, CAMS
Ann Broeker, CAMS
Arun Kiezpadathil, CAMS
Aub Chapman, CAMS-Audit

Audrey Milesi, CAMS
Avraam Demetriou, CAMS
Brian O’Toole, CAMS
Charalambos Anastasiades

Chloe Cina
Chris Ghenne, CAMS
Christophoros Pericleous
Christos Christou, CAMS
Crispin Yuen, CAMS-Audit
Cristina Fleckenstein, CAMS
David Clark, CAMS
Eirini Panagiotou, CAMS
Eoghan Nihill
Eric Sohn, CAMS

acams.org

Eric Caron, CAMS
Erich Ferrari
Evelyn Bell, CAMS
Fernando Contreras
George Voloshin
Gilberto Figueroa, CAMS
Gregory Dellas, CAMS-Audit
Hera U. Smith, CAMS
Holger Pauco-Dirscherl, CAMS-
Audit
Hue Dang, CAMS-Audit
Jacqueline Shire
Jason Rhoades, CAMS
Jennifer Hanley-Giersch, CAMS-
Audit
Jesse Spiro
Jon Harvey, CAMS
Jurgen Egberink, CAMS
Kylie Oliver, CAMS
Lauren Kohr, CAMS-FCI
Liudas Jurkonis, CAMS
Maggie Qiu
Marian Todd, CAMS
Marilu Jimenez, CAMS
Marlene Meli, CAMS

Matt McGuire, CAMS

Melissa Leeds, CAMS

Michel Perez, CAMS
Mireya Valverde, CAMS
Nassos Paltayian, CAMS

Nick Turner, CAMS

Olaf von der Lage
Peter Wild, CAMS-Audit
Rajeev Ahya

Roberto Cillo
Samantha Sheen, CAMS
Samar Pratt, CAMS
Sana Khan, CAMS

Sandro Garcia Rojas, CAMS
Sarah Beth Felix, CAMS
Sine Amyta Edal, CAMS

Stevenson Munro, CAMS
Susan J. Galli, CAMS
Thai Trower, CAMS
Timothy R. White, CAMS
William Scott Grob, CAMS-FCI
Yevgeniya Balyasna, CAMS
ACAMS™®

This document is designed to be printed in black and white.

Copyright © 2020 Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists, LLC (ACAMS).

All rights reserved. As a licensed learner you may download or print this document. It is
copyrighted material. Do not share. No other use is allowed without express written permission
from ACAMS.

acams.org
Table of Contents

Preface 1
About ACAMS

  

 

 

Introduction and Study Recommendations
Recommendations for Studying for the EXAM wu... ceccssssssssssssessesccessssscessssessesstesseesssnceessnneeessueeeeessnnseessneeeesneness 4
Governance and Enforcement 5
Governance and Enforcement 5
Introduction.

 

History of Sanctions
Purpose of Sanctions
Who Imposes Sanctions’...
Influential Organizations
Who Is Subject to Sanctions? uu...
Sanctions Types

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Consequences for NOMCOMPLiANce ou... ceccsssseesssssseseestsseessssecesssssesseeseeseesssnceessnneeeesusesseessnnceessnnusessnuseeeessnseesssnnasessaee
Incorporating Sanctions Compliance into Compliance Programs, Risk Assessment, and Employee
TYTN oaaeessseecssssssseecssssescessnseceesssnseessnsseccessseceesssnssesssssseeeessseeeessnnucessnusssseessueeeessnnsessnussseesseeeeessunseessnuseeessueeeessanseessneaeeesesess 50
Sanctions Evasion Techniques 83
Evasion Methods: Common Techniques 83
Customer Relationships .....csssssccssssessccsesccssssecesssssssesseceesssnseesssnseeeesusseseesssnseessnnessnnsseeessnseeessnnasessnneseessseeeessnnaessaes

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Counterparty Relationships
Two Types of Evasion
Stripping
Separating Messages....
Payments and Transactions
Evasion Attempts by Internal Staff
Trade-Related Evasion Methods

Concealment of Beneficial Ownership
Using Differemt Names ......sssssscsssscsssssssessssseesssssessesssseesssnssesssssescessseceesssnssesssneeeesueseessnnseessnnssseesseeseessnneeessnnanettes
Complex Corporate Ownership Arrangements
Dilution of Sanctioned Ownership...
Proxies or “Front” Parties
Restructuring of Ownership [Interests ......cccsssssscssssescesssseeessssssesseceessssscesssnseseeseseessunseessnnseeesneeseessnseeessnneses

Sanctions Due Diligence

Perform Sanctions Due Diligence
Governance

 

 

Know Your Customer..
Know the Ultimate Beneficial OWNED oo ecsssssesssssssseesssssssssssnseeeensssssntesseeeenseseieneeseeessnniieitesssssnnenieestssssnnneess
Know the Customer’s Nature of Business, Products and Services, and Jurisdiction/Geography 149

CGSS Page i
Version 1.531
Know Your High-Risk Lines of BUSINESS .......sssscsssesccsssseesssssseseeseeescessssecesssnseeseeseeeeessnaseessnnseeeesneeeeessnaseesenneases 155

 

 

 

Sanctions Screening 174
Sanctions Screening 174
SCT@ENING Targets ...eesseecsecsssesessesessnesesceeessnesessseessneeeesseessneessnsessneessncessueeessucesseeeessnaesaueeessnseesueeessnseesueeessneesseeeesnaeeness 174
Name Screening Vs. Payment SCTCCNING .....esseecsssessssescssseessseecssseessseeessseesuesessneesueeessneesseeessueeesteeesneeesteessaneensns 176
Information Technology 177
Automated Screening Tools .....cecccssssessssssscssssscessssseesssseeseesseseessssscessnssessessiesceessnneessnnesessueseessueseessnnueeeseeessnass 177
Fine-Tuning Screening AIQorithims ........csscssssssssccsssesceesssecesssseeseeseescesssssceessneseessuseeseessnnceessnnseeesneseessnseeessnneses 180
Scenarios

 

Understanding Mapping Requirements
Data, Data Flows, and Data Validation n.icccccssssssssssssscsssssssssssscsssssscsssscsscesssssesssesecscessssesssssesssesscsenseensees
Operational Controls

Analytics and Emerging Technology

Regulatory Matters

SANCTIONS LISTS ..cescsssssesssesssessssessessusessusssscessscssuecesessuecssseesessssessussssessusessussusessuseessesuseesueesessueesssssueeessessncassessnserssesnsersnserss

 

 

The Screening Process, Procedures, Important Controls, and Tools

  
 
  
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 

Management Information Systems and Reports
Additional Monitoring and Controls...cccccssssscsssssessssssscessseseesssssessssnsesseessesceessnnscessnnseecessieeeeessneeessnnseessueeeesssnes

Name Screening
Naming Conventions....
Transliteration
ROMANIZATION we eesseessteeessseessseeesssteeeseeessnseesceeesssseessseessuseeesseesssseessnsessnseessusessuseessusessuseessnaesnueeessnseesueeessnseesueeessneesteeeennaeeneas

Payment Screening.
Sources
SWIFT Messages
Challenges
Solving Name and Payment Screening Challenges......ccssssscsssscsssssecessssseesescessssscesssneseesnsseesssnseessnnensss

Trade Activity Screening
Trade-Related Sanctions Lists
Regulatory Expectations

 

Approach
Challenges
Sanctions Investigations and Assets Freezing,

Conducting Investigations

Key Investigation Concepts: Sanctions Lists, Screening Tools, and Identifiers... 221
Key Risk Areas

 

 

The Investigation Process.......... wee

Using a Decision Tree for Investigations

Applying the Decision Tree to Different Types Of Matches... ccsssssccssssseessssssessseeessnneessnneessieeeessnes 228
Reviewing Relevant Sources of Information 238

 

 

Primary Sources of Information

 

Secondary Sources of Information

CGSS Page ii
Version 1.531
Identifying and Blocking (or Freezing) Assets 245

Identification Of ASSES oo ecsssssssscessnseeesssssnsesssssssssesseeesssssssnseeeeenssssnseeseceeenssntieeeeeeeesnnnntieeteessssnneeetsssssnnnenss 245
Comparing Blocking or Freezing Assets in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands............04.. 246
Disclosure to Target Party ....csssssscsssscsssssecesssssssesssessessssecesssseessusseesssnseesssnsesssnsseessnseeessnniessnnuseeseeeeessnneiees 247
Reporting Requirements for Frozen ASSets ..cecssssscssssseesssseseesstescessssecessssseeseeseeeeessnaseessnsieeesneseessnnseessnnesees 247

Managing Frozen Assets
Dealing in Funds

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Confiscation, Seizure, and Forfeiture of Assets
Licenses
Consequences of Noncompliance
Delisting
Management and Reporting Obligations...

 

 

 

Appendix.

Guidance Documents and Reference Material 265
Glossary 268
CGSS Page iii

Version 1.531
Preface

It seems a vast understatement to say that, over the last decade, complying with global
sanctions has become more complex.

Trends over the last decade include:
e More sanctions regimes

e “Smarter’—meaning more targeted—sanctions, requiring greater precision and nuance to
comply

e Increased regulator expectations and fines for violating sanctions restrictions

e Increased guidance from governmental and non-governmental bodies and more “lessons
learned” from enforcement actions.

The increased risk associated with sanctions violations has necessitated the development ofa
profession of sanctions specialists, those well versed in the policies, laws, regulations,
guidance, procedures, technologies, intricate nuances, and even sometimes flat-out
contradictions associated with complying with sanctions.

The Certified Global Sanctions Specialist (CGSS) program is designed to help advance
sanctions compliance as a profession deserving of greater recognition. Much as the CAMS
program did for anti-money laundering, CGSS seeks to define the body of knowledge
underlying sanctions compliance, with a focus on the concepts, legal frameworks, regulator
expectations, and established best practices.

In developing this program, we needed to make a few key decisions about approaching this
complex field.

First, due to the changing nature of specific restrictive measures, the CGSS Study Guide and
exam do not attempt to teach and test knowledge associated with the current state of
individual sanctions, regimes. Instead, specifics of past and present regimes are used as
examples or case studies to demonstrate core concepts, frameworks, best practices, etc.

Perhaps the best example is the JCPOA. The state of Iranian sanctions at the moment of this
writing will almost certainly be different than the moment when you are reading it. That is the
nature of geo-politics and thus the nature of sanctions. To ensure currency of the Study Guide
and exam, CGSS focuses on the enduring, underlying concepts that will help those working in
the profession understand and interpret different and changing sanctions regimes.

Second, we sought to create a program that took the perspective of a global sanctions
specialist, someone working for a global organization who needed to think about multiple
jurisdictions. That led to an obvious focus on United Nations sanctions, which are

CGSS Page 1
Version 1.531
implemented by individual Member States. In addition to the UN, however, we also confronted
the fact that the United States and the European Union pass most of the autonomous sanctions
laws, and these laws can have a global impact on compliance. You will therefore see a
significant amount of content about how OFAC and EU Member State agencies implement and
enforce sanctions. We have also included information on many of the largest jurisdictions, in
particular whether they impose autonomous sanctions, as well as what agencies enforce
sanctions and handle license requests. However, the emphasis on US and EU regulations is a
reflection of the current global sanctions compliance landscape.

Finally, another important concern has been the audience for CGSS. Due to our early focus on
the protections of the financial system through the prevention of money laundering, ACAMS
has a history of serving financial institutions as well as related entities such as money service
businesses. Sanctions compliance, however, applies well beyond financial institutions. In fact,
most fines levied by OFAC in the last several years have targeted manufacturing and shipping
companies.

With the help ofa diverse task force, we have worked hard to address concepts related to non-
financial institutions without diluting a focus on the needs of ACAMS’ existing constituency.
Sanctions due diligence for a bank and a manufacturing company may look different in detail,
but the core concepts remain the same.

We look forward to your feedback on whether we have captured the right balance on all the
choices we have made. Please contact us at https://www.acams.org/contact/.

About ACAMS

The mission of ACAMS is to advance the professional knowledge, skills, and experience of
those dedicated to the detection and prevention of money laundering around the world, and to
promote the development and implementation of sound anti-money laundering (AML)
policies and procedures. ACAMS achieves its mission through:

e Promoting international standards for the detection and prevention of money laundering
and terrorist financing.

e Educating professionals in private and government organizations about these standards
and the strategies and practices required to meet them.

e §6Certifying the achievements of its members.

e Providing networking platforms through which AML/CFT professionals can collaborate
with their peers throughout the world.

CGSS Page 2
Version 1.531
ACAMS sets professional standards for anti-financial crime practitioners worldwide and offers
them career development and networking opportunities. In particular, ACAMS seeks to:

e Help AML professionals with career enhancement through cutting-edge education,
certification, and training. ACAMS acts as a forum where professionals can exchange
strategies and ideas.

e Assist practitioners in developing, implementing, and upholding proven, sound AML
practices and procedures.

e Help financial and nonfinancial institutions identify and locate individuals with the
Certified Anti-Money Laundering (CAMS) designation in the rapidly expanding AML field.

Introduction and Study Recommendations

Welcome to the Study Guide for the Certified Global Sanctions Specialist (CGSS) program. If
you are already CAMS-certified, welcome back! If you are new to ACAMS, we welcome you to
the largest international community of AML and financial crime professionals.

This Study Guide has been created to help people like you prepare for the CGSS exam. The
Study Guide is intended to be the most comprehensive source of information for the CGSS
exam. However, ACAMS also offers instructor-led exam preparation programs, including a
Virtual Classroom course and a one-day Sanctions Exam Prep. Please see our website for
information on these programs as well as upcoming dates.

This Study Guide is divided into seven chapters. The first five of the chapters match the
content domains of the CGSS exam blueprint, which is published in the CGSS Candidate
Handbook, also available on the ACAMS website.

e Governance and Enforcement

e Sanctions Evasion Techniques

e Sanctions Due Diligence

e Sanctions Screening

e Sanctions Investigations and Assets Freezing

e Appendices: Guidance Documents and Reference Material

— Please examine this list carefully and spend time accessing and studying the sources
referenced. Both the Study Guide and the source document reference list are sources
for exam questions, so you should expect questions on the exam that are not
specifically covered in the first five chapters.

e Glossary

CGSS Page 3
Version 1.531
Recommendations for Studying for the Exam

e Seta timeline for taking the exam. Set clear, attainable study goals, and stick to your
schedule.

e When experiencing a desire to procrastinate, commit to working for a minimum of 25
minutes before deciding to change your schedule. That amount of time will often be
sufficient to get over the initial hurdles of focusing your mind on the task and gaining
needed study momentum.

e Recent research suggests that “interleaving”—or studying a mix of subjects rather than
only one ata single sitting—can maintain interest and improve learning over time. If you
find your attention on a subject lagging, it may help to move to a different part of the Study
Guide, or to examine and study some of the reference documents listed in Chapter 8.

e Test yourself. The educational research on this is very clear: you are more likely to
remember information longer if you test yourself rather than just re-read information. The
key is to practice retrieving the information and getting feedback on how well you
remember or understand it. Use the Review Questions as well as the Flash Cards available
on our Learning Management System, to help you do this. Even without these study aids,
practice recalling information soon after studying, including the next day.

e Forma study group. Find another individual or group also preparing for the CGSS exam.
Study groups can take many forms, from simply discussing progress to quizzing each other
to helping each other understand complex topics. The format—in-person meetings, live
online, or simply occasional texts or emails—is not nearly as important as the motivation
that others working towards the same goal can provide.

CGSS Page 4
Version 1.531
Governance and
Enforcement

Governance and Enforcement

 

Introduction

Laws, regulations, interpretive notes, guidelines. Compliance may seem to be a regulatory
construct that is established to create complexity, paper-heavy manuals, and endless
reporting.

And while it may have some (or all of these things), compliance—and especially sanctions
compliance—is so much more. By looking past the regulatory construct, we see world leaders
negotiating foreign policy, cargo ships evading naval destroyers, and powerful institutions
circumventing regulatory oversight. This all takes place on an international stage, and we are
part of this as we design and implement processes in the global fight for important initiatives,
such as counterterrorism, nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the expansion
of human rights. As a profession, sanctions compliance is meaningful. It may not be attention-
grabbing like the professions of movie stars or professional athletes, but the complexity of law,
the paper-heavy manuals clarifying regulations, and the endless reporting are all part ofa
national, international, and global initiative to bring about meaningful change.

Sanctions are defined as measures or actions taken against a target to influence its behavior,
policy, or actions. For our purposes, we have adopted a practical definition to recognize the
use of sanctions as a policy instrument. Simply stated, sanctions have three components:

e aneconomic action
e taken against a target (a state, class of persons, an individual person, or even a function)

e to influence the target’s actions

Sanctions can restrict trade, financial transactions, diplomatic relations, and movement. They
can be specific or general in their implementation and enforcement. Sanctions are also
referred to as restrictive measures. Sanctions compliance is the act of adhering to the
sanctions-related legislation, regulations, rules, and norms that make up the complex

CGSS Page 5
Version 1.531
sanctions landscape. However, as with sanctions, sanctions compliance is not a modern
concept.

History of Sanctions

While the methods used to enforce sanctions have evolved significantly over the past couple of
decades, the nature of sanctions has remained fundamentally the same. One of the first
recorded instances of sanctions dates back to the fifth century BC. With the Megarian Decree
in 432 BC, the Athenians levied economic sanctions, banning citizens of Megara from accessing
markets in the Athenian empire. There were a few reports that Megarian citizens suffered
starvation, and some people believe these sanctions led to the outbreak of the Second
Peloponnesian War.

For most of history, sanctions involved governments choosing to physically block or embargo
trade intended for another nation. Sanctions began to evolve to their current state near the
end of the 19th century. Within Europe, peace societies began to discuss the evils of war and
pacifist alternatives. Sanctions were considered an alternative to war. During the 19th
century, economic sanctions consisted of a type of blockade involving the deployment of
military troops by a country or coalition to block ports of other countries they were not
fighting. The majority of naval blockades were used during war. However, pacific blockades, or
blockades used between nations that were on peaceful terms, were also used in order to
coerce nations to pay debts or settle other conflicts.1

Following World War I, or the Great War, calls for pacifism again gained traction. US President
Woodrow Wilson said of sanctions, “Apply this economic, peaceful, silent, deadly remedy, and
there will be no need for force.” Others have said the human and financial costs of military
force for coercion have become prohibitive. Although the United States never joined, Wilson
aided in the establishment of the League of Nations, a predecessor of the United Nations. The
power to deploy sanctions was included in the League’s Covenant. Article 16 of the Covenant
authorized economic sanctions and military actions against any state that employs war. Four
cases of collective action sanctions were undertaken after the authorization. The least
successful was in 1935-36 when the League of Nations joined with the United Kingdom
against Italy after its invasion of Ethiopia. Sanctions failed there because other European
countries did not follow the League’s restrictions.?

League members worked together to impose boycotts, embargoes, and other restrictive trade
measures against aggressor nations with the intent of bringing about a change in those
governments’ behaviors and policies while avoiding war. The ideas behind the League of
Nations resemble the beginning of multilateral sanctions, or multiple countries working

 

1 Lance Davis and Stanley Engerman, “History Lessons: Sanctions: Neither War nor Peace,” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives 17, no. 2 (2003), 189.
2 Davis and Engerman, 189.

CGSS Page 6
Version 1.531
together to impose sanctions on another country. Unilateral sanctions are imposed by a single
country against a target.

US trade sanctions against Japan factored into the Japanese decision to enter World War IJ and
attack Pearl Harbor. This situation provoked questions regarding whether sanctions were an
alternative to war, or whether they instead might rush nations to use military force. After the
conclusion of World War II, the United Nations was formed in 1945, and sanctions were
formally recognized within the charter as a foreign policy tool.

During the Cold War, governments imposed sanctions more often than in prior decades. The
United States, as one of the two superpowers, imposed sanctions significantly more than any
other country. It was not until the 1990s, after the Cold War ended, that unilateral sanctions
began to be replaced by multilateral, intergovernmental coalitions. While the US continued
leading with the most sanctions, Western Europe, and especially the United Kingdom, began
playing a more active role.3

The most high-profile sanctions were imposed between 1990 and 2003 by the UN against Iraq,
leading up to and following the first Gulf War.* These sanctions cost Iraq an estimated 48% of
its gross national product and had the greatest impact on the livelihoods and mortality of the
country’s poorest residents.5 Since 1990, sanctions have often been targeted at political
leaders, drug lords, and terrorists in an attempt to reduce the humanitarian implications that
resulted from the comprehensive sanctions in Iraq.é

Purpose of Sanctions

Sanctions can provide an alternative to the use of force. They are an extension ofa nation’s
foreign policy to bring about another nation’s change in behavior or foreign policy. In relation
to changing a nation’s behavior, sanctions may be used for:

e Deterrence

e Prevention

e Punishment

Sanctions can target geography or activities. Geographic sanctions target specific countries or

regions, as in the cases of sanctions against North Korea or Crimea. Thematic sanctions focus
on particular issues or concerns that may cut across geographic boundaries, as in the case of

 

3 Davis and Engerman, 198-190.

4 Kimberly Ann Elliott, Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Barbara Oegg, “Sanctions,” The Library of Economics and
Liberty, 1.

5 Davis and Engerman, 193.

6 Elliot, Hufbauer, and Oegg, 1.

CGSS Page 7
Version 1.531
counter-narcotics sanctions. The EU has historically imposed geographic sanctions. In recent
years, the EU has adopted activity or issue-based sanctions as well, including those promoting
human rights.

In addition to being used to protect human rights and avoid using military force, sanctions
have been used for the following purposes:

e Preventing war

e Promoting democratic values

e Punishing human rights abusers

e Preventing nuclear proliferation and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
e The freeing of captured citizens

e The restoration of sovereign lands”

Sanctions Regimes

Sanctions are often referred to as sanctions regimes—a set of sanctions that have a common
theme. Sanctions regimes are either referred to by the issuer of the set of sanctions or by the
intended purpose of the set of sanctions. Examples include the “Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) sanctions regime” and the “North Korea sanctions regime.” Depending on the
context, a sanctions regime may be limited to one country’s or multiple countries’
involvement.

Affecting Behavioral Change

At their core, sanctions are intended to affect behavioral change through deterrence,
prevention, and punishment. In some form or another, all the other purposes of sanctions
contribute to this end. Often review boards or committees are established to monitor the
effectiveness of sanctions because few if any sanctions are intended to be solely punitive in
nature; rather, they include a combination of preventative and deterrence measures.
Considering that the political leaders who may be the targets of sanctions rarely are as
impacted as those in the lowest economic situations, sanctions that do not prevent or deter
targets from their actions may need to be reevaluated or modified.

North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is often spotted being driven ina Rolls-Royce or Mercedes-
Benz vehicle when visiting other countries. Although the UN prohibits the sale of luxury goods

 

7 Davis & Engerman, 190.

CGSS Page 8
Version 1.531
to North Korea, the political elite can often obtain them; the same is not true for ordinary
citizens.®

Other than those sanctions targeted at criminals, such as narcotics kingpins, who are unlikely
to reconsider what they do for a living, sanctions are most effective when tied to incentives for
change, such as the resumption of international aid and loans from supranational
organizations.

Governments sometimes use sanctions to demonstrate their moral resolve, both at home and
abroad. In 1986, for example, the US used sanctions against South Africa that banned new
investments from the United States in South Africa, any sales to the South African police or
military, and any new bank loans, except for the purpose of trade.? The US also prohibited the
import of agricultural goods, textiles, shellfish, steel, iron, uranium, and the products of state-
owned corporations.!° While the impact of the sanctions and the extent to which they
quickened the end of apartheid are uncertain, they were important for the US to implement
domestically to show that the US condemned the state-sponsored racial inequality and
segregation in South Africa at the time.

 

8 Jacob Oliva, “Daimler: We Don’t Sell Limos To North Korea’s Kim Jong-Un,” Motor 1, April 27, 2019

? Richard Knight, “Sanctions, Disinvestment, and U.S. Corporations in South Africa,” Sanctioning
Apartheid, Africa World Press: 1990.

10 Knight.

CGSS Page 9
Version 1.531
Figure 1: Why Sanctions Exist

Sanctions have been used in response to perceived breaches of many different types of
international standards and for various purposes.

Influence actions Purpose

Seaningap mie emeronanent

Freedom and democracy Hastening the achievement of freedom and democracy

 

Nuclear Nuclear nonproliferation

SUED etd ne) Strengthening human rights or labor rights

Free citizens The freeing ofcaptured citizens

The reversal of captures of land

Money laundering and terrorist , . . .
_ ’ Reduction in money laundering and terrorist financing
financing

 

Illegal goods Reduction in trafficking in illegal goods

 

Preventing the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction

The UN’s Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, commonly known as the Non-
Proliferation Treaty or NPT, was signed in 1968 and went into effect in March 1970. On May
11, 1995, the NPT was extended indefinitely. The NPT solidified the international community’s
commitment to preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. Its goal is to create a binding
commitment of disarmament by the five declared nuclear-weapon states and to promote the
peaceful use of nuclear technology while preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and
weapons technology.

The NPT established the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to monitor compliance
with the terms of the NPT. The IAEA periodically inspects the facilities and operations of
member nations who have concluded nuclear safeguards agreements with the Agency. It seeks

CGSS Page 10
Version 1.531
to build confidence and trust among member nations, which helps to prevent the development
of fissile material for military use.11

Nonproliferation sanctions seek to disrupt the function of crime and weapons proliferation.
These sanctions can be applied to countries that fail to comply with sanctions or those that
help others circumvent sanctions. Libya is often seen as a successful example of the use of
sanctions in deterring proliferation.

CASE EXAMPLE: LIBYA AND THE NPT

CASE SUMMARY

Libya ratified the NPT on May 26, 1975. Less than five years later, the US sanctioned Libya as a
state sponsor of terrorism. In the meantime, Libya, with the aid of Russia, continued
developing its nuclear capabilities. The US again imposed additional economic sanctions in
1986, and in 1992 the UN Security Council began imposing sanctions. In 1996, the Iran and
Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) became law. ILSA enabled the US president to further impose
sanctions against foreign companies that invested $40 million or more in the Libyan oil
industry. This number was lowered in 2002 to $20 million.

Despite progress and setbacks in Libyan relations, Libyan president Muammar Gaddafi
announced in December 2003 that it would renounce its Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD)
program. Libya also allowed the IAEA and other international bodies into the country,
enabling these organizations to remove 55,000 pounds of documents and components of its
uranium enrichment program at one time.

Relations between Libya and the international community began to normalize with relief from
sanctions following within a year of Gaddafi’s announcement.

Libya has been seen as a model for other noncompliant nations with international obligations.
In May 2005, during the Nonproliferation Treaty Review Conference, US assistant secretary of
state for arms control Stephen Rademaker stated that Libya’s choice “demonstrates that, ina
world of strong nonproliferation norms, it is never too late to make the decision to become a
fully compliant NPT state,” and that the decision had been “amply rewarded.” 2

The case of Libya also demonstrates that sanctions should be used primarily to incentivize
changes in behavior—not just to punish noncompliant nations.

 

11 United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT).

12 Arms Control Association, Chronology of Libya’s Disarmament and Relations with the United States,
January 2018.

CGSS Page 11
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS
> Sanctions are often a long-term strategy to bring about change as an alternative to war.

> Multilateral sanctions, such as those imposed by the UN, are generally more effective than
unilateral sanctions in achieving a foreign policy objective.

> Sanctions work best when paired with incentives, e.g., foreign investment, instead of only
being punitive.

Diminishing the Power of Regimes to Commit Human Rights Violations

Sanctions are not just about preventing war. The goal ofa sanction might be to achieve
environmental objectives or human rights protections. Sanctions have been used in response
to perceived breaches of many different types of international standards, and for various
purposes, including to influence actions. Examples of thematic sanctions include:

e The strengthening of human rights or labor rights
e The freeing of captured citizens

e The reversal of captures of land

Different regimes are limited by their charters in whether they can pursue sanctions to
enforce issues. Moreover, sanctions may also be limited by the support that can be garnered
among nations.

In the US, the Magnitsky Act allows for unilateral, global sanctions to be imposed on human
rights offenders and corrupt actors. Assets can be frozen and offenders may be barred from
entering the US. The act originated from the mistreatment of attorney and auditor Sergei
Magnitsky by Russian officials while he was ina Moscow prison for investigating fraud related
to Russian tax officials. The law, formally known as the Russia and Moldova Jackson-Vanik
Repeal and Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act of 2012, allows the US to sanction
foreign government officials involved in human rights abuses anywhere in the world,
including those found involved with the assassination of the Washington Post reporter Jamal
Khashoggi in 2018.

Five other countries also have adopted similar laws to the Magnitsky sanctions. In
chronological order, these countries are Canada, Estonia, Lithuania, the United Kingdom, and
Latvia. In January 2019, the EU Parliamentary Assembly urged more countries to follow suit. It
also urged the EU, through its own internal processes, to adopt a human rights sanctions
regime.

An example in which the UN has been able to act and make an impact under its charter is the
trade of conflict diamonds. Beginning in 1998, the UN recognized the need to establish trade
controls over rough diamonds. The illicit trade in diamonds was found to be linked to various
conflicts in West Africa, including in Angola, Céte d’Ivoire, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Based on
these findings, the UN established the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme for rough

CGSS Page 12
Version 1.531
diamonds in 2003. Within the process, governments were required to implement controls on
the import and export of diamonds to both certify and control the trade and also to create a
documentary trail as to the extraction and refinement process.!3

Protecting the Financial System from International Criminals

Sanctions may be used to protect the financial system from international criminals. Criminals
are not limited by geography as governments often are. Sanctions can be imposed to influence
actions that lead to a reduction of money laundering, terrorist financing, and the trafficking of
illegal goods by reducing the flow of funds. A sanction might aim to prevent corrupt officials
from embezzling and from accessing financial services in order to illegally launder money
taken while they were ruling their country.

Then there is the matter of using US currency. The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 establishes rules
about deposits made into foreign bank accounts. The law states that funds deposited ina
foreign bank are subject to US jurisdiction if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the
US as well. This is because the US considers the overseas deposited funds to also make up part
of those interbank funds.

While it is probably not true that all of the overseas deposits make it into the interbank
account in the US, the US utilizes this approach to be able to exert jurisdiction over otherwise
unreachable funds even if the interbank funds cannot be traced directly back to the funds that
were originally deposited.

This means that the assets of the foreign bank located at the US bank may be subject to
forfeiture ifthe foreign bank or one of its customers is involved in violations of sanctions or in
other criminal activity, even if the activity does not directly relate to the foreign bank’s
deposits in the US. The law applies regardless of the foreign bank’s location.

Terrorism-Related Sanctions

In 1999, as a response to the bombing of the US Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, the United
Nations Security Council established a sanctions regime (Resolution UNSCR 1267) that
targeted individuals and entities affiliated with Al-Qaeda and the Taliban. These sanctions
continue to exist and were expanded in 2014 to include individuals and entities affiliated to
ISIS, also known as ISIL or Da’esh.

Also in 1999, the UN General Assembly adopted the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The treaty criminalizes the financing of terrorism
and calls for international cooperation in the detecting and freezing of assets that are used, or
intended for use, to finance terrorism. All signatories to the treaty are required to penalize,

 

13 “Security Council Diamond Sanctions and the Kimberley Process,” Security Council Report, September
28, 2006.

CGSS Page 13
Version 1.531
take into custody, prosecute and, where required, extradite offenders. Although not a sanction,
the treaty is one of the most widely accepted treaties in history and imposes international
obligations on signatories.

Following the attacks of September 11, 2001, the UN passed UNSCR 1373, which obliged all
Member States of the United Nations to sanction terrorist activity. Subsequent resolutions
(e.g., 1624 in 2005, 2396 in 2017, and 2462 in 2019) have built on UNSCR 1373 for the
purposes of countering terrorist financing.

While actual terrorist acts may be relatively inexpensive, terrorist organizations require
funding for the purposes of training, recruiting, and paying out stipends to terrorists and their
surviving family members.

Members of the US government suggested after the September 11 attacks that economic
sanctions would play an equally important part in the war on terrorism as war itself.14
Although terrorist groups will generally not be dissuaded from pursuing their agendas based
on sanctions, the use of economic sanctions may dissuade states from providing refuge and
material support to terrorist groups.

CASE EXAMPLE: SANCTIONS AGAINST SUDAN 1996-2001

CASE SUMMARY

In 1996 the United Nations Security Council issued Resolution 1054, which imposed sanctions
against Sudan due to its government’s involvement in supporting international terrorist
groups, including hosting Osama bin Laden and a number of his close entourage. The Security
Council decided that countries should impose limitations both on diplomatic representation
with Sudan and on the movement of Sudanese dignitaries abroad. Later, the Security Council
expanded the sanctions to include restrictions on the flights of Sudanese officials and aircrafts
run by the national air carrier. As a result of these sanctions, the Sudanese government
suffered economic losses and was not able to attract international investments to its nascent
petroleum industry. The sanctions were lifted in 2001 after Sudan acceded to all international
treaties related to counterterrorism and ordered the expulsion of bin Laden and his followers.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
> Sanctions can be used to provide incentives that reduce state support of terrorism.

> The impact of sanctions is not always immediate.

 

14 Gary Clyde Hufbauer, Jeffrey J. Schott, and Barbara Oegg, “Using Sanctions to Fight Terrorism,”
Peterson Institute for International Economics, November 2001.

CGSS Page 14
Version 1.531
Misappropriation of State Resources

Another purpose behind sanctions is to freeze and return resources that have been
misappropriated by kleptocrats. A kleptocrat is a corrupt leader who exploits the people and
resources of a state for personal gain.

The EU has sanctioned kleptocrats in relation to Tunisia, Egypt after the Arab Spring, and
Ukraine.

Who Imposes Sanctions?

Governments and intergovernmental organizations, such as the UN and the EU, impose (i.e.,
create) sanctions through the passing of laws and regulations. These laws and regulations may
also be called “resolutions” in the case of the UN and “restrictive measures” in the case of the
EU. No matter what they are called, they are sanctions. However, at this stage, these sanctions
are merely embodied in paper and still need to be enforced.

While intergovernmental organizations impose sanctions, they are not often the enforcers of
sanctions, i.e., the function that monitors and ensures compliance with sanctions. The
intergovernmental organizations leave it to member nations and organizations to further
adopt and create methods to enforce these sanctions domestically. Governments that impose
their own sanctions may have one government body pass the legislation and another
government body monitor or enforce the legislation. This is the case in the US, where the
legislative body, Congress, may impose sanctions through the passage of a sanctions bill, and
then those sanctions are enforced through various agencies, federal regulators, and even
through the enlistment of state regulators. Moreover, the obligation to enforce sanctions may
cascade down to non-government actors, as is the case with financial institutions.

Often governments that adopt sanctions will establish a regulatory body, such as a bank
examiner, to visit and examine banks in order to determine whether they are taking necessary
steps to ensure they are not engaging in sanctioned activity. These bank examiners may in
turn discover sanctioned activity that leads to fines and penalties.

More often than not, sanctions are imposed by larger, wealthier states against smaller,
developing states. Sanctions have also been found to be more effective when carried out by
countries that are geographically and economically close to the target, but that have a GDP at
least 10 times larger than that of the target. In other words, larger, more powerful countries
“win” when it comes to sanctions.

Globalization

The effectiveness of sanctions is often determined by the number of participating countries.
This is especially true due to globalization. Globalization weakens sanctions because a
globalized market makes it easier to replace and reroute trade channels. Because of the

CGSS Page 15
Version 1.531
expanding market, countries acting on their own without international support have become
much less effective, especially as the global economic power of those countries diminishes. Ifa
country’s trade is cut off in one way, the country will find another way to get what it wants.
One way to stop these leaks is for countries to work together as a group in order to cut offthe
target from every side. It should be noted that because sanctions are a matter of foreign policy,
nations may vary in their level of commitment to sanctions enforcement.

CASE EXAMPLE: QUEENSLAND MINES

CASE SUMMARY

Australia implemented unilateral sanctions from 1983 to 1986 when it ceased allowing
shipments of uranium to France. Australia used these sanctions in an attempt to get France to
halt testing nuclear weapons in the South Pacific. These unilateral sanctions were ineffective
because in 1984 the price of uranium oxide decreased by nearly 50% in the world market, and
France was able to easily (and more cheaply) replace or reroute this trade channel. Because of
globalization, these unilateral sanctions were ineffective, and in fact actually caused more
harm to Australia. The Australian government paid AU$26 million to the Queensland Mines,
which contracted with France, to cover the losses the company suffered because of its
prohibited deals.15

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Globalization weakens the effectiveness of unilateral sanctions as replacement goods are
more easily found.

This leads to an important sanctions framework—that of unilateral sanctions versus
multilateral sanctions. The United States is most known for its unilateral sanctions.
Multilateral sanctions are sanctions supported by more than one country. The UN is the best
example of multiple countries acting together to enforce a sanctions regime.

Included within this framework are autonomous sanctions. Autonomous sanctions occur
when a single entity, whether a government, such as Australia, or a coalition of governments,
such as the EU, acts to enforce a sanctions regime. Because multilateral sanctions require a
broader consensus among nations that may have different interests, for example, among the
five permanent members of the UN Security Council, most countries have their own version of
autonomous, unilateral sanctions.

However, the EU, which is a collection of nations, also has its autonomous sanctions. These
occur when its Council decides to impose sanctions on its own initiative. While most countries
in the EU do not rely on autonomous sanctions, choosing instead to rely on the EU framework,

 

45 15 Elliot, Hufbauer, and Oegg, 2.

CGSS Page 16
Version 1.531
EU member countries, in turn, can have their own autonomous sanctions, such as when Latvia
passed a version of the US’s Magnitsky Act in 2018, imposing travel restrictions on 49 Russian
citizens. 16

While countries can choose to pursue sanctions on their own, history has shown that
multilateral sanctions are more effective. Recognizing the greater effectiveness of multilateral
sanctions, countries have come together to form intergovernmental organizations. However,
the United States continues to pursue unilateral sanctions.

The primary states and organizations imposing sanctions are as follows:
e United Nations (UN) (multilateral)
e United States (US) (unilateral)

e European Union (EU) (multilateral)

United Nations

The UN uses sanctions as a measure to achieve international peace and security based on
Article 41 of Chapter VII of its founding charter. The UN first imposed sanctions in 1963 and
1965 against the apartheid regimes of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia, respectively. But
at the end of the Cold War, the UN witnessed a surge in sanctions regimes, the objectives of
which covered conflict resolution, nonproliferation, counterterrorism, democratization, and
the protection of civilians.

The Security Council has set some key criteria for targeting individuals and entities. Among
those criteria are:

e Threats to peace, security, or stability
e Violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
e Obstructing humanitarian aid

e Recruiting or using children in armed conflicts!”

The UN prefers targeted sanctions (sanctions against a specific person) over comprehensive
sanctions against a country or region because the latter have greater impact on developing

 

1é “Latvia Becomes Final Baltic State to Pass Magnitsky Law,” Organized Crime and Corruption
Reporting Project, February 9, 2018.
17 United Nations Security Council, Subsidiary Organs of the United Nations Security Council, 2019.

CGSS Page 17
Version 1.531
economies. Civilians, particularly women and children, in those areas are already vulnerable
due to being economically disadvantaged.18

Multilateral sanctions are more difficult to enact as they require more countries to have the
same foreign policy objectives. During the Cold War, the US and Russia were often at odds
with each other, so enacting sanctions in the UN was more difficult. During the period between
1978 and 1981 when the Soviet Union completed a nuclear research reactor in Tajoura, the US
named Libya as a state sponsor of terrorism. With the thawing of the Cold War, the UN
Security Council, which included both Russia and the US, adopted Resolution 748. The
resolution imposed sanctions on Libya, including an arms embargo and travel restrictions.19

The UN Security Council consists of 15 member countries, of which five countries (Russia, US,
UK, China, and France) are permanent members. Each member country has one vote, and to
enact sanctions resolutions, at least nine members, including all permanent members, must
vote in the affirmative, without objection from any of the five permanent members. Effectively
each permanent member has a veto.

After the UN Security Council adopts a resolution, it is legally binding under Articles 25 and 48
of the UN Charter. Article 25 states that Member States are obligated to “accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the present Charter.” After passing a
resolution, the UN establishes a sanctions committee to monitor the implementation and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. If the resolution proves to be insufficient in achieving its
aims, the UN Security Council, under Article 42 of the UN Charter, “may take such action by air,
sea, or land forces as may be necessary to maintain or restore international peace and
security,” including blockades.2°

Article 48 of the Charter constitutes an affirmation of Member States’ obligation under Article
25 of the Charter to accept binding decisions by the Council. Article 48 (1) allows the Council
to limit such duties to selected Members, and (2) makes an attempt to co-opt other
international organizations into the United Nations peacekeeping system.

While the UN passes sanctions, Member States are expected to implement and enforce these
sanctions. Member States pass their own laws and enforcement regulations as well as create
their own enforcement bodies, such as bank regulators and government agencies. Through
monitoring and reporting, these regulators ensure that private institutions, such as financial
institutions and businesses, act within the sanctions regulations.

United States

The US has more sanctions regulations than any other country. The US president is given
broad authority to impose sanctions under an act of Congress, such as the International

 

18 American Center for Law and Justice, Procedures to Impose Sanctions Under the UN Charter, 2011.
19 Arms Control Association, 2018.
20 American Center for Law and Justice, 2011.

CGSS Page 18
Version 1.531
Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) or the Trading with the Enemy Act (TWEA). Under
the act, the president imposes sanctions by executive order (e.g., Executive Order 13622
authorizing Iran sanctions based on the IEEPA authority). Statutes and executive orders are
then further implemented by enacting regulations. The acts passed by Congress do not confer
unlimited authority to the president to impose sanctions. As implied by its name, the IEEPA,
like other acts, empowers the president during a state of emergency. Under the US sanctions
regime, the president must follow reporting requirements imposed by Congress and track
costs. The president must also review and extend the emergency each year. Congress may
terminate an emergency through a joint resolution.

The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is the agency within the Department of the
Treasury responsible for implementing the financial sanctions. It may work in consultation
with other agencies, such as the Department of State. A core component of OFAC sanctions is
the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons list, or SDN list. The SDN list contains
the names and identifiers of individuals, companies, vessels, and other entities whose assets
are to be blocked or frozen.

Additionally, the US has the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS). The BIS is within the
Department of Commerce. It maintains the Denied Persons List, which is a list of persons for
whom export privileges have been denied. The BIS also administers the Export Administration
Regulations (EAR). The EAR applies to commodities, technology, software, and other things
subject to export controls.

Section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act directs the Treasury to designate a financial institution or
jurisdiction as being of “primary money laundering concern” based on numerous jurisdictional
and institutional factors, including the extent to which the institution is used to facilitate or
promote money laundering. While Section 311 is not technically a sanction, the results of
Section 311 measures can be just as severe as sanctions because it prohibits US financial
institutions from providing products or services to other financial institutions that in turn
provide products or services to one of the designated institutions or jurisdictions of concern.
Moreover, US institutions provide an annual notice to their foreign financial institution
customers warning them against maintaining these accounts as downstream correspondent
accounts. The targeted financial institution is effectively cut off from the US dollar payment
system.

In 2005, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) designated Banco Delta Asia, a
bank in Macau, China, as being a primary money laundering concern for allegedly violating
Treasury sanctions against North Korea. However, prior to the designation becoming effective,
the bank suffered a large number of withdrawals. Even before the Treasury had instituted a
formal rule against Banco Delta Asia, the threat of designation alone had triggered the run on
the bank. Its deposits were depleted by 34% within days, and it had to go into receivership.

CGSS Page 19
Version 1.531
European Union

The EU’s restrictive measures (another term for sanctions) are prepared by the European
External Action Service and agreed upon by the Council of the European Union. The measures
are adopted to “bring about a change in policy or conduct of those targeted, with a view to
promoting the objectives of the [EU’s] Common Foreign and Security Policy |CFSP].” According
to the EU’s guidelines on best practices, the EU aims to adopt sanctions in a manner that
conforms to international law and is especially concerned with sanctions that may negatively
impact human rights, fundamental freedoms, and the general well-being of persons.

The EU adopts sanctions through decisions made by the CFSP. Prior to going to the CFSP, the
proposed sanction is examined and discussed by a regional preparatory body. Next, it works
its way through the Working Party of Foreign Relations Counsellors (RELEX), the Political and
Security

Committee (PSC), and the Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER IJ). After
making it that far, the resolution must be unanimously adopted by the CFSP. Upon being
published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the sanction goes into effect.

As a matter of policy, the EU implements all sanctions enacted by the UN Security Council. The
EU does not need to pass any additional resolutions or transpose UN resolutions into EU law.
However, as with its own EU sanctions, Member States of the EU are required to adopt their
own legislation for monitoring and enforcing sanctions, such as penalties for violations.

Influential Organizations

FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE

A group of seven countries formed the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in July 1989 ata
summit held in Paris. The initial purpose of FATF was to develop international standards to
combat money laundering. However, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, FATF
expanded its initial recommendations to include combatting terrorist financing. FATF has
since expanded to include more than 35 countries.

FATF itself has no formal power. Instead, FATF’s influence is derived from the widespread
adoption of its recommendations and its blacklist and greylist. Moreover, Member States of
the United Nations are expected to follow FATF recommendations as per a number of UN
Security resolutions, including Resolution 2462 issued in March 2019.

The blacklist is a list of countries that FATF has determined are noncooperative in the
international fight against money laundering and terrorist financing. This list includes
countries such as Iran and North Korea. Member countries of FATF are expected to apply
countermeasures against blacklisted countries to guard the international financial system
from the risks arising out of those jurisdictions.

CGSS Page 20
Version 1.531
The greylist is a list of countries that FATF has determined do not merit inclusion on the
blacklist but have strategic deficiencies in their anti-money laundering and counterterrorism
financing regimes. Additionally, these countries have not made sufficient progress or
otherwise committed to action plans to address the deficiencies identified by FATF. Ongoing
failure to address these deficiencies could eventually result in being moved from the greylist
to the blacklist. Members of FATF are expected to use caution and consider the particular risks
of those countries on the greylist.21

When a country is placed on the greylist, it may lose access to the global financial system. One
example is the country of Pakistan. In early 2019, India wanted Pakistan placed on the
blacklist for its perceived lack of action against proscribed terrorist groups and failure to
implement and enforce measures against terrorist financing and money laundering. Ina
plenary session of FATF, it was decided to keep Pakistan on the greylist and not move it onto
the blacklist, which would have placed it among the likes of Iran and North Korea. FATF did
warn Pakistan, however, to stick to deadlines with respect to curbing terror financing and
money laundering, or otherwise risk being placed on the blacklist in the next meeting.

Being placed on the greylist comes with consequences. While it is not as severe as being placed
on the blacklist, Pakistan loses an estimated $10 billion annually as a result of its designation
because nongovernmental organizations and other financial actors avoid the operational and
reputational risks associated with dealing with Pakistan.

FATF also evaluates countries’ compliance with its recommendations through Mutual
Evaluation Reports (MERs). MERs take into account, among other things, a country’s
regulatory requirements, supervisory framework of financial institutions, sanctions regimes,
international cooperation, and— most importantly—implementation and adherence to FATF’s
recommendations. Recommendation 6 specifically requires countries to implement targeted
sanctions regimes to comply with UN Security Council resolutions that are relevant to
sanctions. While FATF does not have sanctions lists or restrictive measures, MERs may feed
into financial institutions’ country risk ratings, which in turn impact the level of risk a financial
institution may be willing to undertake in dealing with a particular geography.

Other Jurisdictions

Other countries that have autonomous sanctions have agencies similar to OFAC. Similar
agencies include the following:

THE UNITED KINGDOM (UK)

The UK’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office is responsible for setting the UK’s sanctions
policy. The Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation (OFSI) implements and administers

 

21 Financial Action Task Force. FATF Public Statement, February 22, 2013.

CGSS Page 21
Version 1.531
sanctions, including the granting of licenses, and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)
regulates firms, including financial institutions, to ensure they have controls in place to
comply with UK laws. The Department for International Trade implements trade
measures/sanctions and embargoes.

CANADA

Canada implements its autonomous sanctions under the Special Economic Measures Act
(SEMA), which is administered and enforced by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Canada. The
primary agency regulating financial institutions is the Office of the Superintendent of Financial
Institutions (OSFI). Canada also has the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre
(FINTRAC), which is Canada’s financial intelligence unit that may impose administrative
monetary penalties for violations of the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist
Financing Act.

AUSTRALIA

Australia’s sanctions regime consists of UN Security Council sanctions, including
counterterrorism sanctions, and limited autonomous sanctions concerning Iran, Libya,
Myanmar, North Korea, Syria, Russia/Ukraine, and several other territories. Australia
implements autonomous sanctions under the Autonomous Sanctions Act of 2011. Australia’s
general sanctions policy is set by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT). The
Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) is also engaged in regulating
financial institutions and ensuring compliance with Australian law. Like the United States and
European Union, Australia has implemented targeted sanctions and a partial embargo of the
Crimea region following Russia’s annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol in March 2014.
Australian sanctions generally do not have “extraterritorial” effects.

CHINA

China is a permanent member of the UN Security Council. China takes part in the formulation
of international sanctions through UN Security Council resolutions and implements those
resolutions through various domestic laws, regulations, and directives aimed at Chinese
persons, companies, and financial institutions. China also implements limited autonomous
sanctions concerning issues such as terrorism. The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA)
is principally responsible for oversight of Chinese sanctions and promulgates sanctions
through official announcements and through other governmental departments such as the
People’s Bank of China (PBOC) and the Ministry of Public Security (MPS). The Chinese
government may, from time to time, exert economic pressure through informal directives
aimed at state-owned enterprises or limited commercial boycotts, although such initiatives do
not impose general prohibitions applicable to the public. Chinese sanctions generally do not
have “extraterritorial” effects.

CGSS Page 22
Version 1.531
FRANCE

France implements both EU and UN sanctions but may also establish sanctions on its own. The
French Treasury Directorate (Direction générale du Trésor), which is part of the Ministry of
the Economy and Finances, has a dedicated website to describe and explain the different
sanctions regimes and how they apply to French entities. It has issued a guide (“Code de
Bonne Conduite,” last updated in 2016) and various tables, which are recaps of sanctions
currently in place. The French Treasury also maintains an updated list of applicable sanctions
country by country and information on military equipment and dual-use goods. Exporters or
other legal entities that might be concerned by sanctions must report to a designated service;
however, they must first conduct their own due diligence and provide their conclusions.
Exporters and other legal entities should address their requests for licenses or exemptions to
an office of the French Treasury.

GERMANY

Germany implements both UN and EU sanctions. It also has its own autonomous sanctions that
are implemented primarily though the Foreign Trade and Payments Act
(Aufenwirtschaftsgesetz) and the Foreign Trade and Payments Ordinance
(Aufenwirtschaftsverordnung), which is enacted in part on the basis of the Foreign Trade and
Payments Act. The Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi) has responsibility
for applying Germany’s autonomous sanctions and does so primarily by coordinating with the
Federal Office of Economics and Export Control (BAFA) and the central bank of Germany,
Deutsche Bundesbank. BAFA is primarily responsible for the licensing and certifications
required for the export of certain controlled goods. BAFA, among other requirements, collects
information on an applicant’s experience in defense activities, industrial activity, written
commitments, and other information to assess the applicant’s reliability. The Federal Financial
Supervisory Authority (Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology) supervises financial
institutions.

HONG KONG (China)

The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR) implements UN Security Council
sanctions, including counterterrorism sanctions, under the direction of the Chinese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs (MFA) (with the exception of any UN sanctions targeting the Chinese
mainland). Hong Kong does not have an autonomous sanctions regime. Multiple agencies
share responsibility for the administration and enforcement of sanctions in the SAR. These
include the Chief Executive, Department of Justice, Customs and Excise Department,
Commerce and Economic Development Bureau, Trade and Industry Department, Hong Kong
Monetary Authority (HKMA), Securities and Futures Commission (SFC), and other bodies that
are responsible for oversight of companies and financial institutions in compliance with Hong
Kong AML/CFT and UN sanctions laws and regulations. The HKMA has increased oversight of
sanctions compliance by authorized financial institutions in recent years, including by

CGSS Page 23
Version 1.531
undertaking a thematic review of sanctions name screening technology. Given the wide variety
of foreign financial institutions operating in Hong Kong, many financial institutions in the SAR
also are required to (or choose to) comply with US, EU, or other domestic sanctions
regulations.

INDIA

Generally speaking, India’s economic sanctions framework is less extensive than other
countries in Asia. India also retains strong economic ties to countries, such as Iran, which are
subject to various other international sanctions regimes. Like other United Nations members,
India implements UN Security Council resolutions, in particular, anti-terrorism sanctions, but
India does not have unilateral or autonomous sanctions. Indian sanctions laws generally apply
within India and do not have “extraterritorial” effects. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the
country’s central bank, publishes notifications to financial institutions in India concerning
updates to relevant sanctions lists. RBI is also the country’s primary AML/CFT regulator.

JAPAN

Japan implements both UN Security Council sanctions and certain autonomous sanctions,
which are applicable to Japanese persons and companies and in Japan’s territory. Notably,
Japan imposes unilateral sanctions targeting North Korea, which may be coordinated with
sanctions by other countries such as the United States. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) and
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) both take part in overseeing Japan’s
sanctions regime. MOF, which is Japan’s principal AML/CFT regulator, also oversees
compliance with sanctions by financial institutions in Japan as part of their overall AML/CFT
programs. Japanese law enforcement also compile lists of “anti-social forces,” which include
the names of organized crime members. These lists are made available to financial institutions
in Japan for the purpose of customer screening.

NEW ZEALAND

New Zealand implements UN Security Council sanctions through the country’s Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). New Zealand sanctions are generally applicable to New
Zealand citizens, companies incorporated in New Zealand, and activities taking place in New
Zealand’s territory. New Zealand does not have unilateral or autonomous sanctions (except
travel bans) and their sanctions lack “extraterritorial” effects. Additional oversight of
sanctions compliance may be provided by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBZ), the
Financial Markets Authority (FMA), and the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), which share
responsibility for oversight of New Zealand’s AML/CFT framework.

CGSS Page 24
Version 1.531
TAIWAN

Although not a member of the United Nations, Taiwan generally implements and enforces UN
Security Council sanctions through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) and the Bureau of
Foreign Trade (BFT). Of note, Taiwan issued a total ban on trade with North Korea in
September 2017 in response to heightened UN and US sanctions against North Korea.
Furthermore, as a member of the Asia Pacific Group (APG), a Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) regional-style body, Taiwan is obligated to adopt international anti-proliferation and
counterterrorism sanctions. The BFT is primarily responsible for reviewing and approving
licensing requests and issuing regulations and guidance concerning Taiwan sanctions and
export controls. Like many countries, Taiwan maintains a list of sensitive commodities such as
dual-use goods. This list is published by the BFT. The Financial Supervisory Commission (FSC)
has oversight of Taiwanese financial institutions’ compliance with sanctions as part of their
overall AML/CFT programs.

SINGAPORE

Singapore, like most Asia Pacific countries, implements UN Security Council sanctions and
limited autonomous sanctions. Financial sanctions are administered by the Monetary
Authority of Singapore (MAS). Under the Terrorism (Suppression of Financing) Act, Singapore
has the ability to designate terrorist subjects through the Inter-Ministry Committee on
Terrorist Designation (IMCTD). Singapore sanctions generally do not have “extraterritorial”
effects. However, as an important regional trading hub, Singapore is influenced by many
international sanctions regimes, including US and EU sanctions that apply to many
international financial institutions operating in the country.

SOUTH KOREA

South Korea implements autonomous sanctions under the Prohibition on the Financing of
Offences of Public Intimidation and Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act
(amended in May 2014 from the original act). Under the act, the Financial Services
Commission may designate entities that are found to be related to terrorist financing. South
Korea’s Financial Supervisory Service regulates financial institutions, and the Ministry of
Trade, Industry, and Economy is responsible for trade restrictions.

SWITZERLAND

Switzerland implements both UN sanctions and its own autonomous sanctions. Its Federal Act
on the Implementation of International Standards (the Embargo Act or “EmbA”) is the set of
regulations enabling it to enact sanctions ordered by the UN, the EU, or its significant trading
partners. Under EmbA, compulsory measures allow it to: “a. directly or indirectly restrict
transactions involving goods and services, payments and capital transfers, and the movement

CGSS Page 25
Version 1.531
of persons, as well as scientific, technological and cultural exchange” and “b. include
prohibitions, licensing and reporting obligations as well as other restrictions of rights.” Under
the Federal Council, exceptions may be allowed for humanitarian activities, such as for food
and medicine. Those persons that are impacted, either indirectly or directly by the measures,
are subject to inspection of their business premises without prior notice during working hours
for the examination of documentation and other relevant information. Switzerland’s State
Secretariat of Economic Affairs maintains its sanctions list, which can be found online.

Who Is Subject to Sanctions?

There are two categories of those who are subject to sanctions. First are the individuals and
entities required to comply with sanctions, and second are those who are eligible targets of
sanctions.

Sanctions are applicable to everyone. While, for instance, an individual might not personally
conduct due diligence of every vendor prior to buying a cup of coffee in order to determine
whether it is sanctioned, the buyer could be held liable, for example, ifthe beans were sourced
from Iran, however unlikely. Complying with sanctions requires using a risk-based approach.
Even though guidance is provided on how best to comply with sanctions, it is not expected
that the average citizen will have a personal, fully formed sanctions compliance program.

Additionally, sanctions are a matter of jurisdiction. Citizens of a country (and permanent
residents) must comply with sanctions regardless of whether they are outside of their home
country. This is true for US, EU, and most other autonomous sanctions. Ifa person is on
vacation overseas, their country’s sanctions laws still apply. Conversely, any individual,
regardless of citizenship, must comply with the sanctions law of any country they are in
physically.

The following is a summary of people and entities who must comply with OFAC regulations:

e UScitizens and permanent residents wherever located

e Companies and other entities organized under US law

e All people and organizations, whatever their origin, physically in the United States; and

e All branches of US companies and other entities throughout the world

Note that for legal entities, the rules are similar to those for people. Any legal entity physically
located in a jurisdiction is subject to that jurisdiction. So foreign branches, agencies, and
subsidiaries in the US must comply with US sanctions, and any foreign branches, agencies, and

subsidiaries physically located within the territory of the EU, including its airspace, must
comply with EU sanctions. This principle will generally apply to all autonomous sanctions.

In its 2012 Guidelines on Implementation and Evaluation of Restrictive Measures (Sanctions)
in the Framework of the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy, the EU expressly states that

CGSS Page 26
Version 1.531
the sanctions it imposes will apply only where links to the EU are present. In paragraph 88, the
guidelines state that regulations shall apply:

e Within the territory of the (European) Union, including its airspace
e Onboard any aircraft or any vessel under the jurisdiction of a Member State

e To any person inside or outside the territory of the (European) Union who is a national of
a Member State

e To any legal person, entity or body, inside or outside the territory of the (European)
Union, which is incorporated or constituted under the law of a Member State

e Toany legal person, entity or body in respect of any business done in whole or in part
within the (European) Union

In the US, legal entities organized under US law and their foreign branches must comply with
US sanctions. The same holds true for legal entities and their branches that are organized
under the laws of an EU jurisdiction. For example, UK legal entities established under UK law,
including their branches, must also comply with UK financial sanctions in force, irrespective of
where their activities take place.

However, under EU sanctions, a company’s subsidiaries located and doing business outside of
the EU are not subject to EU sanctions. This does not apply to branches of EU companies, as
branches are not distinct legal entities. Although EU sanctions are not extraterritorial, the EU
may issue anti-circumvention legislation preventing EU companies from circumventing EU
sanctions by using a non-EU subsidiary as a proxy. For example in the context of
Ukrainian/Russia related sanctions, Article 12 of Council Regulation 833/2014 prohibits
companies from: “participate, knowingly and intentionally, in activities the object or effect of
which is to circumvent the prohibitions..., including acting as a substitute for entities...”

But if sanctions regimes do not necessarily have prescriptive rules that must be followed
regardless of the potential for a violation to occur, such as a legal requirement to collect
identifying information on a customer, then why do financial institutions spend so much
money on these programs? The answer is that domestically, governments regulate compliance
with sanctions through penalties, including fines and imprisonment.

In this respect there may not be much difference between the coffee shop at the exit of the
subway and the large financial institution at which compliance professionals work. Both are
subject to the same fines and penalties that may result from a sanctions breach. However,
because the cost of a cup of coffee is $3.12 and its sale to a sanctioned target would have little
impact on undermining the purpose of a sanctions regime compared to the remittance ofa
$50,000 wire to a sanctioned target in a sanctioned country, some industries, like financial
institutions, should have robust sanctions compliance programs.

Given the large exposure financial institutions may have to potential sanctions violations and
the large fines that may occur, financial institutions may be regulated for sanctions compliance
as a matter of safety and soundness to their financial health. The US is a well-known example

CGSS Page 27
Version 1.531
of this. The US enforces sanctions compliance programs on regulated institutions as a matter
of safety and soundness. This means that sanctions violations may result in penalties so large
that the safety and soundness of the financial institution is placed in jeopardy.

To help firms avoid sanctions violations and penalties, OFAC released “A Framework for OFAC
Compliance Commitments,” providing guidance on compliance programs. These are not
regulations with which noncompliance could lead to found violations. Rather, they are agency
guidance to help firms avoid sanctions violations and penalties.

It is also important to keep in mind that, while economic sanctions apply to property, the term
“property” is very broadly defined to include much more than money and trade goods. In the
US, the terms “property” and “property interest” include checks, merchandise, trademarks,
annuities, and a broad array of other interests as defined in US law.22

This broad definition would include virtually all financial or commercial activity. Although
there are sanctions, such as travel bans, that do not involve property, economic sanctions have
by far the most implications for a sanctions compliance program.

Facilitation

A different restriction, which can have a broad geographic reach, concerns activities described
under the US sanctions regime as facilitation, or “approval.” The prohibition on facilitation is
found in 31 CFR 506.208 and reads:

Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this part, and notwithstanding any contract
entered into or any license or permit granted prior to May 7, 1995, no United States person,
wherever located, may approve, finance, facilitate, or guarantee any transaction by a foreign
person where the transaction by that foreign person would be prohibited by this part if
performed by a United States person or within the United States.

This essentially means that a US person may not facilitate or assist the activities of a non-US
person if those activities would violate sanctions ifthe non-US person were a US person. This
applies to US persons located anywhere in the world. In other words, a US person cannot do
indirectly what he or she is directly prohibited from doing.

This offense has attracted particular attention when financial institutions and other
companies have employed members of senior management who are considered US persons
under the US sanctions regimes, as well as when US consultants have worked overseas for
financial institutions.

A simple example of facilitation would be if a US citizen, working as director of a European
company, took part in a business decision to enter a deal with a company in Iran. Other types
of facilitation would include US employees working for a branch in the US and advising its
parent overseas on conducting transactions that would otherwise be prohibited if they were

 

2251 FR 2463, January 16, 1986.

CGSS Page 28
Version 1.531
to engage in them. The purpose of the prohibition of facilitation is to prevent the evasion of
sanctions through indirect actions. Examples of prohibited activity include the following,
among others:

e US parties may not approve, finance, or guarantee any transaction in which they
themselves are prohibited from engaging.

e US parties may not provide merchandise to be used in connection with a prohibited
transaction or make a purchase for the benefit of a prohibited transaction.

e US parties may not provide services in support of or in connection with prohibited activity.
e US parties may not provide guidance on prohibited activity.
e US parties may not alter their corporate policies to allow for prohibited transactions.

e US parties may not refer business to a foreign person that would involve a prohibited
transaction.23

At the other end of the spectrum of conduct, activities that are purely clerical or reporting
related, such as reporting ona subsidiary’s trade with a sanctioned country, would not
necessarily constitute facilitation.

CASE EXAMPLE: SCHLUMBERGER OILFIELD

CASE SUMMARY

Schlumberger Oilfield Holdings, Ltd. (“Schlumberger Oilfield”) is incorporated in the British
Virgin Islands but has its headquarters in Houston, Texas. It is a direct subsidiary of
Schlumberger Ltd., a multibillion-dollar oil and gas conglomerate. Schlumberger Ltd. is
incorporated in the Netherlands Antilles/Curac¢ao.

Beginning in February 2004 Schlumberger Ltd. worked with Schlumberger Oilfield’s Drilling
and Measurement segment in Houston. By doing so, Schlumberger Oilfield knowingly violated
sanctions by:

e “Systematically approving and disguising capital expenditure requests from operations in
Iran and Sudan for the manufacture of new tools and for certain expenditures;

e Directing and overseeing the transfer of oilfield equipment from projects in non-
sanctioned countries to projects in Iran and Sudan;

 

“cr

23 Shearman and Sterling LLP, “Facilitation’: A New Tool for Extraterritorial Sanctions Enforcement?”
April 17, 2015

CGSS Page 29
Version 1.531
e Making and implementing business decisions specifically concerning projects in Iran and
Sudan; and

e Providing certain technical services in order to troubleshoot mechanical failures and to
sustain sophisticated oilfield services equipment in Iran and Sudan.”24

While the Houston operations did not directly engage in this activity, it provided support to its
parent company to facilitate transactions that it could not do itself.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Facilitation is a concept that applies to US persons not directly engaged in sanctioned
activity.

> Facilitation is a broad concept that may encompass a variety of activities, such as
overseeing the transfer of equipment for a non-US person to sanctioned locations.

> US persons are prohibited from making business decisions on behalf of non-US persons for
projects in sanctioned countries.

> Providing technical or advisory expertise for operations in sanctioned countries may be
prohibited as facilitation.

Extraterritoriality of Sanctions Program

Extraterritorial jurisdiction, or “extraterritoriality,” is the ability of a state to make, apply, and
enforce laws, regulations, and other rules of conduct in respect to persons, property, or
activity beyond its territory. The US is the primary government engaged in applying
extraterritoriality to its sanctions regime. The EU, believing that the practice of
extraterritoriality violates international law, does not allow for the concept of
extraterritoriality in relation to the sanctions restrictions it imposes. The EU describes
extraterritorial sanctions as sanctions that “non-US citizens and companies are also expected
to comply with” outside the jurisdiction of the US. These sanctions are also known as
“secondary sanctions” as opposed to “primary sanctions.”

As stated previously, in its 2012 Guidelines on Implementation and Evaluation of Sanctions,
the EU expressly states that the sanctions it imposes will apply only where links to the EU are
present (primary sanctions). The EU also follows this concept when it is implementing
sanctions introduced by the UN. The purpose for secondary sanctions stems from
globalization weakening the impact of primary sanctions as alternative finance and trade
become more available.

However, people often misunderstand the idea of extraterritoriality, taking it to mean that the
restrictions imposed by EU sanctions cannot apply to persons or activities once they are

 

24 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for August 7, 2015.

CGSS Page 30
Version 1.531
outside of the EU’s geographic borders. In fact, restrictions imposed by the EU apply to all EU
persons, wherever they are in the world.

CASE EXAMPLE: HONDA FINANCE, 2017

CASE SUMMARY

American Honda Finance Corporation (AHFC) entered into a settlement agreement for
$87,255 to settle its potential liability regarding 13 transactions that appeared to violate the
US sanctions against Cuba. AHFC is headquartered in California, United States, and is a motor
vehicle finance company. AHFC has a majority-owned subsidiary, Honda Canada Finance,
located in Canada. Between February 2011 and March 2014, Honda Finance Canada financed
13 lease agreements between an unaffiliated Honda dealership in Ottawa, Canada, and the
Embassy of Cuba. AHFC voluntarily disclosed the transactions, and OFAC determined the
violations were non-egregious.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> US sanctions programs may apply to subsidiaries of US companies operating outside of the
jurisdiction of the US, for example, Cuban and Iranian programs. Sanctions compliance
programs should understand the full scope and applicability of sanctions programs based
on their risk exposure.

> Financing provided between an unaffiliated company and a sanctioned entity falls within
the scope of US sanctions.

In relation to US embargoes, the US application of extraterritoriality forbids non-US persons to
export goods that are of US origin, or contain content or part of US origin, to embargoed
countries. This prohibition of re-exports has a broad reach. While licenses can be obtained to
allow for these transactions, as a general policy these licenses are denied.

CASE EXAMPLE: EPSILON, 2014

CASE SUMMARY

Epsilon Electronics Inc. settled its potential civil liability for doing business in violation of the
Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations for $1,500,000. The penalty arose from
invoices issued between August 2008 and May 2012 for sales to Asra International LLC, a.k.a.
Asra Electronic Trading Co. OFAC found that Epsilon “knew or had reason to know that [Asra
International LLC] distributed most, if not all, of its products to Iran.”25

As revealed in Epsilon’s appeal, Asra’s website “touted the company’s success in the Iranian
market, contained a directory of dealers who were all located in Iran, and displayed photos

 

25 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for September 3, 2018

CGSS Page 31
Version 1.531
from trade shows in various Iranian cities.” The website also included a “Contact Us” page with
only two addresses, one in Dubai and the other in Tehran, Iran. Epsilon, in turn, had copied
images found on Asra’s website and displayed them on its website under the label “Iran.”
Additionally, Epsilon had a 2008 freight manifest that included a record of a shipment from its
address directly to Asra’s Tehran address. 6

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> The export/re-export provision covers exports where the company “knew or had reason
to know” the final destination was a sanctioned target.

> The application of “reason to know” is very fact-based.

BLOCKING STATUTES

In 1996, largely as a countermeasure to the US extraterritorial sanctions against Cuba and
Iran, the EU passed legislation to address the US application of extraterritoriality. This is
referred to as the “blocking regulation.” It can be found in Regulation (EC) No. 2271/96. These
regulations essentially ban Member States from complying or assisting the US in enforcing the
restrictions imposed under these sanctions. Up until May 2018, the legislation was largely
ignored.

On May 8, 2018, US president Donald J. Trump announced his decision to cease US
participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), or Iran nuclear deal, and to
begin re-imposing the US nuclear-related sanctions that had been lifted as part of that
agreement. In response, the European Commission launched the process to activate the EU
blocking regulation by updating the list of US sanctions on Iran falling within its scope. Once
the re-imposed US sanctions were added, the blocking regulation required companies
incorporated in EU Member States to:

e Notify the European Commission within 30 days whenever the renewed US sanctions
directly or indirectly affect their economic or financial interests;

e Not comply with the extraterritorial effects of these listed US sanctions, and

e Not enforce, within in the EU, any foreign court judgments or decisions of administrative
bodies, such as OFAC, based on the reinstated US sanctions.

Article 5 of the Blocking Regulation does provide a mechanism for EU companies to ask the
European Commission for an exemption to the regulation “if they can demonstrate that
compliance with the regulation would ‘seriously damage their interests’ or the interests of the
EU.”27

 

26 Leagle, Epsilon Electronics, Inc. v. US Dept of Treasury, May 26, 2017.
27 European Parliament, “Updating the Blocking Regulation,” June 2018.

CGSS Page 32
Version 1.531
Additionally, the EU blocking regulation allows Member States of the EU to impose sanctions
when there is a breach of the EU’s blocking regulation. Finally, the EU blocking regulation
allows the EU person impacted by extraterritorial sanctions to recover damages for losses
resulting from “the application of [extraterritorial sanctions] or actions based thereon or
resulting therefrom.”

Other countries, such as Canada, have similar blocking regulations.

CASE EXAMPLE: WALMART CANADA, 1997

CASE SUMMARY

In March 1997, a Canadian Walmart subsidiary removed from its shelves pajamas that were
made in and imported from Cuba. The US demanded that Walmart, a US company, comply with
US sanctions by requiring its Canadian subsidiary to remove the Cuban-made pajamas.
However, Canada’s blocking regulation prevented the Canadian subsidiary from removing the
pajamas lest it face potential penalties upward of C$1.5 million for noncompliance with
Canada’s countermeasures, i.e., the blocking regulation, that were designed to neutralize US
sanctions. Walmart was faced with a dilemma, and after initially deciding to remove the
pajamas, the threat of Canadian fines made Walmart decide that the risk of liability was
greatest from the Canadian government. As a result, Walmart restocked the Cuban-made
pajamas.?8

Walmart ultimately paid a fine of $50,000 to OFAC with no finding of liability.
KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Blocking regulations, similar to some sanctions, are a way of showing moral opposition,
but may not necessarily be enforced.

> Blocking regulations may place companies in no-win situations in which they will violate
one country’s laws.

The blocking regulation in the EU has not been enforced because the US has stated
unequivocally that it is willing to impose secondary sanctions on those entities violating US
sanctions, even if the sanctions being violated are extraterritorial. Within this context, the EU
blocking regulation is only applicable to the extent that an EU entity makes its decision not to
do business with a unilaterally US-sanctioned entity “based on or resulting” from US
sanctions.

 

28 Harry Clark, “Dealing with U.S. Extraterritorial Sanctions and Foreign Countermeasures,” Penn Law:
Legal Scholarship Repository, 1999.

CGSS Page 33
Version 1.531
This requirement allows entities to base their decisions on various other reasons, such as
human rights issues. Despite the EU blocking regulation, numerous EU companies have
withdrawn their business from Iran to avoid the United States' secondary sanctions. The
Belgian-based SWIFT, which facilitates messaging and financial transactions across the world
with more than 11,000 financial institutions, withdrew from Iran to continue supporting the
global financial system without interruption.2? Other EU companies have likewise withdrawn
with no indications of the fines or penalties having been levied.

In response to the US withdrawal from the JCPOA, and in addition to the EU blocking
regulation, the EU has undertaken development of a system called INSTEX. INSTEX is short for
“Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges.” The concept is to create an exchange that will
allow EU companies to continue trading with Iran despite US sanctions. INSTEX would match
orders from Iran with equivalent orders in the EU and avoid the cross-border movement of
funds. However, the utilization of INSTEX by EU entities could also result in the US imposing
secondary sanctions against that entity.

How Sanctions Regimes are Determined

Because sanctions can target individuals, sanctioned targets can be anywhere in the world, not
just in sanctioned countries or high-risk countries. Foreign individuals and entities could also
be caught by US sanctions where it is determined that they have caused others to violate a US
sanction. This includes activities undertaken outside of the US. Knowledge is nota
requirement—a bank operating in Poland, for example, could be in violation ofa US sanctions
restriction if it processes transactions involving any US-origin goods destined for Iran.

Sanctions are constantly changing, as exemplified by the US entering into the JCPOA under
President Obama and then exiting under President Trump.

UNITED NATIONS

The United Nations administers various ongoing sanctions regimes. Some of these regimes
target individuals and entities specific to a Member State of the United Nations. The ISIL/AlI-
Qaeda sanctions regime is not specific to any country or territory. Some countries with
individuals or entities under sanctions are:

e Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
e Iran

e Libya

 

29 Peter Eavis, “Important European Financial Firm Bows to Trump’s Iran Sanctions,” New York Times,
November 5, 2018.

CGSS Page 34
Version 1.531
e Mali

e Somalia

The UN also maintains its United Nations Security Council Consolidated List, which includes all
persons and entities that are subject to UN sanctions. An example of a person on the list and
provided information is shown in Table 1.3°

Table 1: United Nations Security Council Consolidated List

TAi.159 Name: 1: ABDUL JAN 2: WAZIR 3: SALIH MOHAMMAD 4: na

Name (original script): as Asst me jules al

Title: na

Designation: Official of the Ministry of Finance during the Taliban regime

DOB: 1966

POB: Barlach Village, Qareh Bagh District, Ghazni Province,
Afghanistan Good quality

aka. a) Abdul Jan Salih
b) Abdul Jan Salih Low quality a.k.a: na

Nationality: na

Address: na

Listed on: 6 Jan. 2012 (amended on 31 Dec. 2013, 11 Feb. 2014 )

Other information: Key commander of the Haqqani Network (TAe.400), which is

based in Afghanistan/Pakistan border area. Acts as deputy,
spokesperson and advisor for Haqqani Network senior leader
Sirajuddin Agha Barakzai(TAi.192). Liaises with the Taliban
Supreme Council. Has travelled abroad. Liaises with and
provides Taliban commanders in Ghazni Province,
Afghanistan, with money, weapons, communications
equipment and supplies.

Reportedly deceased as of 2013. INTERPOL-UN Security
Council Special Notice web link:

Additionally, users can download lists and search names within the UN website and determine
whether the person or entity is on the UN list.

UNITED STATES

The US OFAC administers various sanctions programs, which are either comprehensive or
targeted. Examples of those targeted sanctions include Counter Narcotics Trafficking

 

30 United Nations Security Council Consolidated List.

CGSS Page 35
Version 1.531
Sanctions, Global Magnitsky Sanctions, and Transnational Criminal Organization sanctions.
Examples of comprehensive sanctions include Iran Sanctions and North Korea Sanctions. The
entire list of OFAC sanctions regimes can be found on OFAC’s website.

Moreover, OFAC administers the widely known Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons list, commonly referred to as the SDN list. This is a published list of individuals and
companies “owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, targeted countries.” It also
lists individuals, groups, and entities, such as terrorists and narcotics traffickers, designated
under programs that are not country-specific. Collectively, such individuals and companies are
called “specially designated nationals” or SDNs. Their assets are blocked and US persons are
generally prohibited from dealing with them.”3! The list is frequently updated.

Sanctions lists include names and as many identifiers as possible. This is to avoid problems
that may result due to homonyms and near-identical names (i.e., mistaken identity). For
natural persons, this may include surname and first name, spelling in original language,
transliterations, aliases, date of birth, place of birth, nationality, address, and identification
numbers, such as a passport number. For non-natural persons, information should seek to
include full legal entity name, principal place of business and place of registration, and any
identification numbers, such as a tax identification number.

OFAC also has a search tool that can be used to screen names.

EUROPEAN UNION

EU sanctions in force include those issued by the United Nations as well as the autonomous
sanctions issued by the European Union. The EU has the second-highest number of active
sanctions programs, second only to the US. The EU provides an EU Sanctions Map for an

 

31US Department of the Treasury, Resource Center.

CGSS Page 36
Version 1.531
overview of its various active sanctions programs. The EU sanctions programs are categorized

by:

e Those adopted by the EU and UN

e Thematic overviews

- Chemical weapons

- Cyberattacks
- Terrorism
e Country

e Measures

- Arms embargoes

- Asset freezes

- Embargoes on dual-use goods

Similarly to the UN, the EU also provides a consolidated list of those sanctioned, as shown in

Table 2.

Table 2: EU Consolidated List

EU reference number:
Legal basis:

Identity information:
Name/Alias:
Function:

General Staff. Remark:

Name/Alias:
Name/Alias:

Birth information:
Birthdate
Birthplace:

Osh Remark:

EU.XXXX.00
KR Ukraine

Igor Nikolaevich Mostovoy Title: Lt. Gen.

Former de facto Commander of Russian troops deployed on the
ground in the illegally annexed Crimea (whom Russia continues
to refer to officially as ‘local self-defence militias’). Former
Deputy Commander of the Southern Military District. Currently,
he is the Head of Department of Public Administration and
National Security at the Military Academy of the Russian

Lt. Gen.

Yropb Huxonaesuy Mocrosponu

Igor Mykolayovich Mostovoy

08/02/1949
Unknown country
Kyrgyz SSR

Key differences in EU sanctions and US sanctions include:

e EU sanctions must be reviewed and renewed at periods no longer than a year, and can
even be as short as three months; most US sanctions are open-ended and remain in force
until a decision is made to lift them. This may result in the EU being quicker to respond to

CGSS
Version 1.531

Page 37
positive developments. One example occurred when the US eased some restrictions on
Myanmar/Burma in December 2016. Four years earlier, the EU had already lifted all of its
sanctions other than an arms embargo.?2

e USsanctions are generally much broader in scope, targeting a much wider range of goods
and many more persons.

e USsanctions may be extraterritorial whereas EU sanctions prohibit extraterritoriality.

e US sanctions include those entities owned 50% or more by a sanctioned target (SDN) and
aggregate beneficial ownership, but do not include entities controlled by a sanctioned
target. EU sanctions include entities owned more than 50% by a sanctioned target, but
also include entities controlled by a sanctioned target even if ownership is not more than
50%.

OTHER COUNTRIES: “CONSOLIDATED LIST”

Other countries that similarly maintain their own sanctions lists will also likely maintain a
“consolidated list,” or a list ofall those individuals and entities that they currently sanction. If
the country is also a Member State of the UN, then this is in addition to the UN sanctions. In the
United Kingdom, Her Majesty’s (HM) Treasury maintains a consolidated list, which is
published by the Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation (OFSI). The list can be found on
the UK’s website. An example of an entry on the list is included in Table 3.

Table 3: UK Consolidated List

138. Name 6: DELLOSA 1: REDENDO 2: GONZALES 3: n/a 4: n/a 5: n/a.

DOB: 14/09/1962

POB: Punta, Santa Ana, Manila, Philippines

a.k.a: (1) ABUILONGO (2) ABUMUADZ (3) ALVARADO, Arnulfo (4)
BERUSA, Brandon (5) DELLOSA, Habil, Ahmad

Nationality: Filipino

Address: 131, Ma. Bautista, Punta, Santa Ana, Manila, Philippines.

Other Information: UN RefQI.D.XXX.08. Also referred to as Uhlman, Danial and Troy.

Member of the Rajah Solaiman Movement and linked to the Abu
Sayyaf Group. Father's name is Ferdinand Rauol Dellosa.
Mother’s name is Editha Parasido Gonzales. In detention in the
Philippines as of Feb 2010.

Listed on: 10/07/2008

Last Updated: 19/02/2011

 

32 Martin Russell, “EU sanctions: A key foreign and security policy instrument,” European Parliament
briefing, European Parliamentary Research Service, May 2018.

CGSS Page 38
Version 1.531
Group ID: 1066.

Additionally, an example from AUSTRAC’s list is shown in Table 4.

Table 4: AUSTRAC List
Reference 2
Name of Individual _ MOHAMMAD HASSEIN ABBOUD
or Entity
Type Individual
Name Type Primary Name
Date of Birth a) Approximately 1945-1948 b) Approximately 1945-1950
Place of Birth Pashmul village, Panjwai District, Kandahar Province, Afghanistan
Citizenship Afghanistan
Address NA
Additional Title: a) Mullah b) Haji. Designation: a) First Deputy, Council of Ministers
Information under the Taliban regime b) Foreign Minister before Wakil Ahmad under the

Taliban regime c) Governor of Kandahar under the Taliban regime d) Political
Advisor of Mullah Mohammed Omar. A close associate of Mullah Mohammed
Omar (TI.0.4.01) Member of Taliban Supreme Council as at Dec. 2009. Belongs
to Kakar tribe. Review pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1822 (2008)
was concluded on 21 Jul. 2010.

Listing Information _ Listed by UN 1267 Committee on 27 January 2002 (amended on 21 December
2005, 8 July 2007 and 29 Sep 2007, 29 Nov. 2011)

Committees 1989 (Taliban)

Control Date 15/12/2014

Exemptions & Exceptions (Licenses)

Historically, sanctions were an all-or-nothing action taken against another country, usually in
the form of an embargo. Today, most sanctions regimes include a licensing program. A license
is a written authorization issued by a sanctions regulator that permits an activity that
otherwise might be prohibited or restricted under a particular sanction. The laws or
regulations passed to implement financial sanctions will generally contain a licensing program
that allows otherwise prohibited transactions to take place in some circumstances in the form
of general licenses and specific licenses. General licenses and specific licenses can also be
viewed in terms of exemptions and exceptions, respectively. A general license, or exemption, is
available to all persons authorizing the performance of certain categories of transactions, and
the transacting persons under these licenses do not necessarily require approval from the
licensing agency beforehand. For example, pistachios and carpets, well-known commodities
from Iran, used to be under a general license given their popularity.

Alternatively, a person can request a specific license, or exception, from the administering
agent on a case-by-case basis under certain limited situations and conditions. These specific

CGSS Page 39
Version 1.531
licenses allow for transactions that are otherwise prohibited and must be presented with the
licensed transaction. A request must be submitted for a specific license from OFAC. For
straightforward transactions, it may take OFAC a few months to make a determination. For
more complex transactions, the process can last up to a year or longer.

Ifa person is denied an OFAC license, they may appeal the decision ina US federal court.
However, historically, the courts have provided substantial deference to OFAC’s decisions.

The global nature of trade and transport activities means there might be a number of different
jurisdictions where a license is required. The documentation needed for these activities can
also be quite complex.

The overall objective of the licensing system is to strike an appropriate balance between:

e Minimizing the risk of assets being used by a sanction’s target to engage in restricted
activities, and

e Meeting the human rights or basic needs of a target while avoiding unintended economic
consequences for unrelated industries and parties.

Those exemptions can be based on purpose or class of person, or achieved through a licensing
regime. Most sanctions regimes contain general licenses for acquiring legal services, including
OFAC, which allows for providing legal services to sanctions targets for the following, among
other things:

e Compliance with US and state laws so long as it is not related to the facilitation of
sanctioned activity

e Representation before an agency with respect to US sanctions

e Representation where the US law requires access to legal counsel at the public’s expense,
for example, in criminal proceedings

Additionally, OFAC allows for nonscheduled emergency services to be provided for sanctions
targets. However, in many cases, the receipt of payment for the services, medical and legal,
still must be specifically licensed.

In the UK, the Export Control Joint Unit is responsible for issuing licenses to export controlled
goods and goods that might be caught by a country-specific embargo.

Other authorities in the UK, such as OFSI, issue license applications to deal with the funds or
assets of targeted individuals.

CGSS Page 40
Version 1.531
The UK has issued a small number of general licenses under two of its terrorism-related
sanctions restrictions. These general licenses apply only in the specific circumstances set out
in each license. The permitted activities may include:

e Issuing insurance to a sanctions target and allowing certain temporary provisions under
insurance policies, such as the use of a courtesy car or temporary accommodation

e Paying solicitors who provide legal aid where advice or representation is sought by the
sanctions target

e Allowing a third party, such as a family member, to pay money to solicitors who may be

acting for a sanctions target

The EU’s guide to best practices distinguishes between economic resources and consumptive
use. Whereas the former are subject to sanctions, the latter are not prohibited “owing to their
consumptive nature and lack of transferability.” These exemptions apply to domestic supplies
such as gas, electricity, telephone, and other utilities because “preventing consumptive,
personal use of economic resources is neither desirable nor intended.” In the case of mistaken
identity, the EU also establishes as a best practice that natural persons should be able to access
necessary funds for their basic needs while the investigation is ongoing. An example would be
a refugee requiring a bank account for social welfare payments.

Sanctions Types

It is important to understand how to identify the various categories and types of sanctions, as
the meanings of words are important to a strong governance, risk management, and
compliance framework.

Types of Sanctions

e Trade Sanctions

e Financial Sanctions

e Comprehensive Sanctions

e Targeted Sanctions (Smart Sanctions)
e Sectoral Sanctions

e Travel Bans

CGSS Page 41
Version 1.531
Economic Sanctions

Economic sanctions can be divided into trade sanctions and financial sanctions. Economic
sanctions are intended to impact targets in two primary ways:

e Imposing trade sanctions that limit the target country’s exports or restrict its imports

e Imposing financial sanctions that impede finance (including reducing aid)33

TRADE SANCTIONS

Embargoes are trade sanctions that intend to limit the targeted country’s imports and exports.
Trade sanctions in the form of limits on a country’s exports aim at reducing its foreign sales
and its foreign exchange. Trade sanctions in the form of limits on a country’s imports (or the
sanctioning country’s exports to the target country) aim to deny the targeted country critical
goods. When the sanctioned country exports a large percentage of total global output, the
imposition of export restrictions may cause higher prices for alternative sources and for
alternative goods.

Total trade embargoes are rarer because of their unintended consequences to the citizenry of
a targeted country. Most trade sanctions are selective, meaning that they target, for example,
energy, gas, finance, or luxury goods. Moreover, in most cases, the trade is only diverted. Trade
sanctions also rarely impact the political elite (who may also benefit from the black market),
and their impact is generally diffused throughout the entire population of the country.34

Transshipment of goods is the shipment through intermediate countries prior to the goods’
final destination. This can become risky as these intermediate countries might be sanctioned,
as in the case of shipping goods first through a port of Iran prior to landing in Afghanistan.
Sanctions regimes may also specifically prohibit transshipment of goods.

Understanding the geographic scope of sanctions is vital to ensuring that customer due
diligence and ongoing monitoring are conducted correctly. The wide reach of the restrictions
imposed by the US and the EU means that steps must be taken to clearly understand the
geographic links a customer might have in terms of their citizenship, residency, place of
registration and operation, and the location of related or subsidiary entities.

Trade restrictions can have multiple geographic connections. For this reason, understanding
the restrictions that might apply to each of those connections is critical to ensuring that
possible sanctions risks are identified before business is transacted.

Arms embargoes are a specific type of embargo that only applies to weapons and dual-use
goods, which are goods that can be used for both civilian and military purposes.

 

33 Elliott, 2.
34 Elliot, Hufbauer, and Oegg, 2.

CGSS Page 42
Version 1.531
The Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods
and Technologies, or the Wassenaar Arrangement (WA), includes 42 states that have
committed to greater responsibility and transparency in the exports of weapons and dual-use
goods. The core objective of the WA is to provide information to members on those entities
whose application for export licenses for providing certain goods were denied.

For conventional weapons, members voluntarily report information every six months. For
dual-use goods and other sensitive items, the WA breaks the reporting into tiers. For tier 1
items, which are “basic items,” the members agree to voluntarily provide information on those
proposed export licenses that were denied to non-Wassenaar members twice per year. For
tier 2 items, the WA requests members to notify the Wassenaar Secretariat when an export
license is denied to non-Wassenaar members on proposed transfers. Additionally, members
are to report to the Wassenaar Secretariat any export license approvals of “essentially
identical” transactions that another member has previously denied.

The WA assists members to control arms exports and prevent arms from being acquired by
terrorist groups.

FINANCIAL SANCTIONS

Financial sanctions may come in many forms. Governments may impose financial sanctions by
prohibiting government loans and intergovernmental loans to targeted countries, or they may
interrupt their commercial finance by labeling them as non-cooperative or of primary money
laundering concern. This hurts the economy by causing the target country to pay higher
interest rates and also by drying up their funding, as creditors avoid the additional credit risk
or the risk of being sanctioned themselves.?5 Sanctions may also come in the form of asset
freezing. For asset freezes, the assets ofa sanctioned target are required to be held or “frozen,”
and the sanctioned target cannot access or use them. This comes most often in the form of
frozen bank accounts (or “blocked” bank accounts, as they are more commonly called in the
US).

In contrast to trade sanctions, financial sanctions are more difficult to avoid, especially given
the interconnectivity of the global payment systems.

Financial sanctions are also more likely to impact the targeted individual or individuals
instead of being diffused through the population. These sanctions take money out of the
pockets of the targeted countries’ government officials and also deter funding for “pet
projects.” Financial sanctions also impact trade, as financial institutions are less likely to
engage in trade finance. Thus trade can be impacted without trade sanctions being explicitly
imposed.

 

35 Elliot, Hufbauer, and Oegg, 2.

CGSS Page 43
Version 1.531
Comprehensive Sanctions

Comprehensive sanctions aim to prevent all transactions between a sanctioning country and
the sanctioned country. Comprehensive sanctions nonetheless generally allow for exemptions
for humanitarian and medical purposes under a general license. However, outside of those
exemptions, there can be no imports, exports, provision of financing, exchange or distribution
of technology, or any other financial or trade activity. Comprehensive sanctions would also
include a full trade embargo and a cease of diplomatic relations.

Different sanctions regimes have different comprehensively sanctioned countries because
sanctions are a matter of foreign policy, which may create conflict. For example, while most
countries agree that North Korea should be comprehensively sanctioned, such is not the case
with Cuba. Comprehensive sanctions do not discriminate between the individuals in a country
who are shaping and implementing policy and the uninvolved residents in that country. As
such, they can be seen as unhumanitarian.

An example of comprehensive sanctions resulting in a virtually total financial and trade
embargo was the UN embargo on Iraq. On August 6, 1990, the UN Security Council imposed
comprehensive economic sanctions on Iraq. This was in response to the Iraq invasion of
Kuwait. After the US-led coalition pushed Iraq out of Kuwait, the sanctions were left in place
to incentivize disarmament.

The comprehensive Iraq sanctions were harshly criticized because of their disparate impact
on the innocent Iraqi civilians and unclear influence on the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein to
change his behavior.3¢

Targeted Sanctions (Smart Sanctions)

In the 1990s, there was increasing concern over the impact of sanctions on civilian groups.
Comprehensive sanctions were seen as blunt weapons that most impacted those civilians who
were already economically disadvantaged.

Targeted sanctions, sometimes called “smart sanctions,” allow for greater discrimination in
imposing sanctions, especially considering that a particular geographic location can contain
many different ethnicities, minorities, and other groups. The idea is that the policy and
behavior of the government is not necessarily reflective of the attitudes ofthe people being
governed. Targeted sanctions also reject the philosophy that causing civilian pain and unrest
leads to political change, or hold that if it does, such a trade-off is not acceptable.

 

36 Global Policy Forum, “Sanctions Against Iraq.”

CGSS Page 44
Version 1.531
Sectoral Sanctions

Since 2014, sectoral sanctions have been a new type of sanction, though they have raised
compliance questions since their advent.37 (Sectoral means “in a certain part or area.”) The
corresponding list is called SSI: Sectoral Sanctions Identification, which is published by OFAC.
This type of sanction is even narrower than targeted sanctions. Sectoral sanctions target key
entities as well as sectors of a country’s economy. These sanctions are meant to be highly
tailored. Sectoral sanctions prohibit certain types of transactions with certain people or
entities in the targeted country within a targeted sector of the economy. Sectoral sanctions are
very dependent on facts when applied.

Sectoral sanctions first were used against Russia when it illegally annexed Crimea and
Sevastopol. These sanctions blocked the issuance of new long-term debt and equity against
state-owned Russian banks, Russian energy companies, and Russian defense companies,
among others.

OFAC publishes this list to identify persons operating in sectors of the Russian economy
identified by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to Executive Order 13662. Directives
found within the list describe prohibitions on dealings with the persons identified.

The SSI list is not part of the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list. However, individuals
and companies on the SS] list may also appear on the SDN list. Note that the SDN list is very
broad, and the SSI Russian sectoral sanctions list is very narrow. These are just two of the lists
a business must screen its customers against.

CASE EXAMPLE: HAVERLY SYSTEMS, INC, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

Haverly Systems, Inc. (Haverly), a New Jersey corporation, entered into a settlement
agreement for $75,375 with OFAC to resolve its potential liability because of two invoices
issued on August 19, 2015. In April 2015, Haverly issued two invoices to JSC Rosneft (Rosneft)
with payments due between 30 and 70 days from issuance, or between September 18, 2015,
and November 09, 2015. Rosneft then notified Haverly that before it could issue payment, it
required corrected tax documentation. Haverly spent several months providing the corrected
tax documents. Upon providing the documents, Rosneft remitted payment on the first invoice
on May 31, 2016, which was more than nine months after the issuance of the original invoice.

Following the remittance of the first payment, Rosneft attempted to make the remaining
payment four times between May 31, 2016, and October 27, 2016. All four attempts were
rejected by financial institutions upon determining that the transaction was prohibited by
OFAC’s prohibition of debt of greater than 90 days maturity. During this time, Haverly
received copies of SWIFT messages that indicated that their rejection was because ofa

 

37 American Trade and Manufacturing Blog, “Russian Sectoral Sanctions ina Nutshell,” October 1, 2014

CGSS Page 45
Version 1.531
connection to sectoral sanctions. Haverly did not have a compliance program in place and did
not submit to OFAC voluntary disclosures. Most likely this came to OFAC’s attention because of
the involved banks filing reports to OFAC.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Apayment not processed and returned by a financial institution may be an indication of a
sanctions nexus requiring investigation.

> Firms should remain aware of higher-risk jurisdictions and exercise caution before
transacting with them.

> Financing of debt may also include invoicing for payment at a later date.

Travel Bans

Travel bans are sanctions that limit where an individual can travel. They often come in the
form of denying visas to individuals, such as political and military leaders of the sanctioned
country. These travel bans can undermine leaders’ legitimacy, illustrate moral resolve, and
also cut off these individuals from accounts that they may hold overseas. Travel bans are most
effective when used with other types of sanctions.

Consequences for Noncompliance

Noncompliance, at its core, can result in civil penalties and criminal punishments, even prison.
The UN and EU rely on members to enforce sanctions regimes. The US is best known for its
enforcement of penalties and the resulting fines; however, other nations have begun issuing
more severe penalties for sanctions violations.

Within the US, OFAC uses its enforcement guidelines as the method for determining whether
additional investigation is merited, whether there should be a civil penalty, and if so, what the
amount of the civil penalty should be. When determining whether to initiate a civil
enforcement proceeding, OFAC considers factors such as “whether the violation involved
willful or reckless conduct, the harm the violation caused to the sanctions program objectives,
and the individual characteristics of the violator.”38 These characteristics may include whether
the violator has a sanctions compliance program, how sophisticated the program is, and what,
if any, remedial measures were taken to address the issue and prevent its recurrence.

Another consideration is whether the entity voluntarily self-disclosed the potential violation.
Ifa company determines that it has violated OFAC sanctions, it may file a voluntary self-
disclosure, taking the position that the violation only constitutes a civil violation as opposed to

 

38 Kirkland and Ellis, “Voluntary Self-Disclosure of Sanctions Violations: How It Works in the U.S. (Part
2),” January 19, 2018.

CGSS Page 46
Version 1.531
a criminal violation. However, a company may file a voluntary self-disclosure and OFAC may
disagree with its filings or the nature of the violation (civil or criminal).

However, if the case is an egregious case, meaning that the activity was willful or reckless or
the entity was aware of the conduct, this will be another factor taken into consideration.

In response to a violation, OFAC may take no action, or may take a number of actions,
including issuing a caution, imposing a civil monetary penalty, or even referring the case for
criminal prosecution.

OFAC also has a schedule for how it administers fines based on transactions (noting there is
variance based on the particular program; for example, under the Kingpin Act, the maximum
penalty is $1,000,000). The severity (or amount) of the fine is directly correlated with the
amount of transaction value. The higher the transaction value, the higher the fine.3?

Additional considerations for mitigating the potential penalties are whether the entity
cooperated with OFAC’s investigation, whether the management was involved in the violation,
and whether the entity has a robust compliance program in place.

Consequences to the Individual

Individuals are subject to sanctions; therefore all individuals are liable to fines and penalties.
These fines and penalties vary from country to country. In the US, this may include a fine of up
to $1 million and 20 years in prison.

In Australia, prison time can be up to 10 years and may include fines of AU$450,000 or three
times the value of the transaction.

CASE EXAMPLE: BOBBY FISCHER, 1992

CASE SUMMARY

In September 1992, Bobby Fischer, an American chess grandmaster, returned to chess after a
20-year absence. Fischer played a chess match against the Russian chess grandmaster Boris
Spassky. The exhibition match took place in Yugoslavia, which was sanctioned in June 1992 by
the US through an executive order restricting commercial transactions. In December 1992,a
US federal grand jury indicted Fischer for violating sanctions. Fischer, if prosecuted, faced up
to 10 years in prison and a fine as high as $250,000. Though he won his chess match, Fischer
never returned to the US.

 

39 31 CFR 501, November 9, 2009.

CGSS Page 47
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS
> Individuals, not just entities, are prosecuted under sanctions programs.

> Prosecution of individuals most likely will result in criminal penalties.

Consequences to the Organization

Sanctions are generally strict liability for organizations. Strict liability means the organization
is liable even if it did not intend to violate the sanctions or knowingly violate the sanctions.
Organizations are also liable even if they have robust sanctions compliance programs in place.
When assessing a penalty on an organization, OFAC takes into account whether the
organization acted knowingly and how sophisticated the organization’s sanctions compliance
program is.

Because OFAC takes into account mitigating factors, a large majority of OFAC cases result ina
Closed Case (No Action) or a Cautionary or Warning Letter. This is because most organizations
try to comply with sanctions.

CASE EXAMPLE: ILLINOIS TOOL WORKS, INC,, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

In February 2019, OFAC assessed a penalty of $5,512,564 against Applichem GmbH
(AppliChem). AppliChem is a German-based manufacturer of chemicals and reagents. OFAC
assessed the fine because of 304 transactions that occurred between May 2012 and February
2016 that violated sanctions against Cuba. AppliChem became subject to the US sanctions
against Cuba because four months before the first transaction occurred, it was acquired by the
US company IIlinois Tool Works, Inc. (ITW).

Upon acquiring AppliChem, ITW sent AppliChem managers guidelines on ITW’s sanctions
compliance, but AppliChem continued fulfilling contracts that were created prior to being
acquired. Upon discovery, ITW’s legal department again instructed AppliChem that all
transactions must cease. ITW’s legal department also filed a voluntary self-disclosure to OFAC
in January 2013. In response, OFAC issued a cautionary letter in May 2015.

In January 2016, “an anonymous report was made through the ITW ethics helpline”*° about
AppliChem’s continued sales to Cuba through an intermediary. ITW conducted a full
investigation and discovered AppliChem’s former owners had created a scheme to continue
making sales to Cuba. ITW ceased employing the former owners and again made a self-
disclosure to OFAC.

 

40 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for February 14, 2019.

CGSS Page 48
Version 1.531
OFAC determined that this latter self-disclosure involved violations that constituted an
egregious case. The statutory maximum civil monetary penalty was $20,045,688, covering 304
transactions for a value of $3,433,495 in shipments.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
> Sanctions violations are strict liability but do not necessarily result in a fine.

> Companies must be vigilant in monitoring and correcting remedial action after a violation
is detected.

> Civil penalties may be lessened by OFAC through cooperation in investigations and
through other mitigating factors.

REPUTATIONAL DAMAGE

Reputational damage or reputational risk is the risk of losing financial capital, market share,
goodwill, or other revenue because of negative perception about a firm’s reputation. In August
2012, shares of the British bank Standard Chartered fell more than 23% on the London Stock
Exchange after regulators accused the bank of helping Iran evade sanctions by covering up to
$250 billion in transactions during a 10-year period.*! This reputational damage also comes
with loss of business, civil penalty, and costs of remediation.

Fines and penalties, especially when they are ongoing because a firm fails to remediate the
issues, also may impact valuations and investor portfolios.

FINES

Sanctions enforcements against corporations primarily come in the form of fines and an
agreement to fix the problems that led to the fines.

IMPRISONMENT

Violations of sanctions may also result in imprisonment. For this reason, strict liability only
applies to civil penalties where a finding of intention to violate sanctions is not required. As a
criminal penalty, imprisonment only applies to individuals (legal persons cannot be
imprisoned). This does not mean an individual cannot be working for a company when he or
she commits the violation.

Individuals who are found violating sanctions may also be extradited from one country to the
sanctioning country.

 

41 Ben Rooney, “Standard Chartered’s stock drops on Iran allegations,” CNN Money, August 7, 2012.

CGSS Page 49
Version 1.531
Incorporating Sanctions Compliance into
Compliance Programs, Risk Assessment, and
Employee Training

To comply with regulatory expectations and manage sanctions risk, financial institutions must
establish compliance programs based on a risk assessment and consistent with the
methodology adopted by anti-money laundering (AML) risk-assessment and compliance
programs. This includes providing appropriate employee training and ensuring the
institutions remain up-to-date on all current sanctions-related topics.

Management Commitment

On May 2, 2019, OFAC published “A Framework for OFAC Compliance Commitments”? to
provide organizations that are subject to US jurisdiction, as well as foreign entities that
conduct business in or with the United States or US persons, or that use goods or services
originating in the United States, with OFAC’s perspective on the essential components ofa
sanctions compliance program (SCP). An SCP is a program run by a firm to comply with
regulator expectations concerning sanctions compliance and to manage the firm’s sanctions
risk. OFAC encourages organizations subject to US jurisdiction to use a risk-based approach to
sanctions compliance by developing, implementing, and regularly updating SCPs. SCPs follow a
similar methodology to that adopted by anti-money laundering compliance programs.
According to OFAC, the five essential components of an SCP are:

1. Management commitment
Risk assessment
Internal controls

Testing and auditing, and

ae WwW DN

Training

The OFAC document states that: “Senior Management’s commitment to, and support of, an
organization’s risk-based SCP is one of the most important factors in determining its success.
This support is essential in ensuring the SCP receives adequate resources and is fully
integrated into the organization’s daily operations, and also helps legitimize the program,
empower its personnel, and foster a culture of compliance throughout the organization.”

 

42 US Department of the Treasury, “OFAC Issues a Framework for Compliance Commitments,” May 2,
2019.

CGSS Page 50
Version 1.531
Embedding a culture of compliance into the overall structure ofa firm is critical to the
development and ongoing administration of an effective compliance program. Typically, the
ultimate responsibility for the compliance program rests with the organization’s board of
directors. The board and senior management staff members need to communicate the
commitment to compliance by:

e Openly voicing and demonstrating their commitment to ethical values and integrity
e Ensuring that their employees also embrace these values
e Ensuring that their commitment flows through all service areas and lines of business

e Holding responsible those parties who are accountable for compliance—both full-time
employees in compliance and those employees engaged in business

Aculture of compliance is essential because firms that have strong commitments to ethical
values, such as honesty and integrity, tend to stay out of trouble and attract the best talent and
the most desirable clientele.

Although creating a culture of compliance cannot resolve all current or future issues, an
effective compliance program focused on identifying and controlling risks is critical to the
overall success of an institution. Associates in all business units must clearly understand and
practice their commitment to strictly abiding by the rules. Because a written compliance
program and training cannot account for every set of circumstances that may arise, adopting a
culture of compliance is the most effective way to prevent small issues from becoming
systemic problems.

An adequate compliance program represents a financial investment that management can be
reluctant to support. The compliance officer’s challenge is to convince management that the
compliance program is an indispensable expense to protect the institution and avert legal
problems and reputational harm.

As a result of findings by the US Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) of
numerous financial institutions with compliance deficiencies, including involvement of boards
and senior management staff members, FinCEN released an advisory in August 2014. It
suggested six guidelines for strengthening compliance culture in financial institutions,
including:

1. Leadership must actively support and understand compliance efforts.

2. Efforts to manage and mitigate compliance deficiencies and risk must not be compromised
by revenue interests.

3. Relevant information from the various departments within the organization must be
shared with compliance staff to further the institution’s compliance efforts.

4. The institution must devote adequate resources to its compliance function.

CGSS Page 51
Version 1.531
5. The compliance program must be effective. One way to ensure this is by using an
independent and competent party to test the program.

6. Leadership and staff must understand the purpose of its compliance efforts and how its
suspicious transaction reporting (STR) is used.

Further emphasizing the need for a culture of compliance, the New York State Department of
Financial Services (NYDFS) issued Final Rule Part 504 on June 30, 2016, requiring regulated
institutions to maintain transaction monitoring and filtering programs (TMPs) that are
reasonably designed to:

e Monitor transactions after their execution for compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA)
and AML laws and regulations, including suspicious activity reporting requirements

e Monitor transactions prior to their execution to prevent unlawful transactions with targets
of economic sanctions administered by OFAC

The Final Rule, which went into effect on January 1, 2017, also requires boards of directors
and/or senior officer(s) of regulated institutions to make annual certifications to the NYDFS
confirming that they have taken all steps necessary to comply with TMP requirements.

Although the law may appear to be New York-specific, numerous foreign banks’ US operations
must comply with it because they operate in New York. Specifically, the law covers banks,
trust companies, private bankers, savings banks, and savings and loan associations chartered
pursuant to the New York Banking Law, as well as all branches and agencies of foreign
banking corporations licensed pursuant to the Banking Law to conduct banking operations in
New York (as opposed to a license issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency).
Moreover, the law also applies to nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) with a Banking Law
license, such as check cashers and money transmitters. Penalties for noncompliance are
consistent with those under the Banking Law.

Filtering programs may be manual or automated, and must be reasonably designed for the
purpose of interdicting transactions that are prohibited by OFAC. The programs should have
the following attributes, to the extent applicable:

1. Be based on the risk assessment of the institution

2. Be based on technology, processes, or tools for matching names and accounts, in each case
based on the institution’s particular risks, transactions, and product profiles

3. Include end-to-end testing and pre- and post-implementation testing of the filtering
program, including, as relevant, the following: a review of data matching, an evaluation of
whether the OFAC sanctions list and threshold settings map to the risks of the institution,
the logic of matching technology or tools, model validation, and data input and program
output

CGSS Page 52
Version 1.531
4. Be subject to ongoing analysis to assess the logic and performance of the technology or
tools for matching names and accounts, as well as the OFAC sanctions list and the
threshold settings to see ifthey continue to map to the risks of the institution

5. Include documentation that articulates the intent and design of the filtering program tools,
processes, or technology

CASE EXAMPLE: U.S. BANCORP, 2018

CASE SUMMARY

In 2018, four United States regulators fined U.S. Bank more than $600 million for failures in its
AML compliance program. According to the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New
York, from 2009 to 2014 the bank “willfully failed to establish, implement, and maintain an
adequate AML program.”

One focus of the complaint involved improperly funding the compliance team responsible for
investigating potentially suspicious activity. Rather than sizing its compliance program to the
alerts being generated, the bank restricted or froze the number of employees, and placed caps
on the number of alerts that would be investigated. Although members of the AML compliance
team specifically noted the lack of investigative resources as a risk, the bank did not provide
the increased funding necessary to meet the identified need; and the number of investigators
remained constant even as the bank’s assets, suspicious activity reports, and law enforcement
inquiries increased. 43

In addition, testing showed that the thresholds set in the transaction monitoring system were
failing to catch a high percentage of suspicious activity. But, instead of changing the
thresholds, the bank halted the testing program.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Although this isan AML and nota sanctions compliance case, the takeaways apply to
sanctions programs as well. The case demonstrates that it is critical for a compliance
program to have adequate resources.

> Providing sufficient resources based on an institution’s risk profile is an essential
component of a management commitment to a culture of compliance.

> The number of employees ina compliance program cannot drive the number of
transactions reviewed. Rather, the number of transactions requiring review should drive
the headcount.

 

43 Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, “FinCEN Penalizes U.S. Bank National Association for
Violations of Anti-Money Laundering Laws,” February 15, 2018

CGSS Page 53
Version 1.531
The key to maximizing the compliance unit’s usefulness is to share valuable data with other
areas of the firm, not simply with law enforcement agencies, regulators, and senior
management. As compliance units build their customer due diligence (CDD) files, they can
identify information that other departments can use to cross-sell products and expand profits.
For example, marketing departments that better understand the activity of certain retail or
business customers can more effectively identify opportunities to market additional products
and deepen the overall customer relationship. For example, given the TMP’s emphasis on data,
firms have strengthened their controls over data governance and enhanced data quality. This,
in turn, has led to increased opportunities for providing more clear and accurate metrics to
senior management on risk exposure, markets in which the firm does business, the number of
specific customers, etc., allowing management to make more informed strategic decisions.

Although improving data quality for TMP can also result in marketing benefits, it is important
to review applicable privacy laws and the firm’s privacy policy before releasing customer
information to ensure understanding of any limitations. There are usually no regulatory issues
with sharing customer information with internal departments within the same legal entity;
however, there may be limitations on sharing information with other affiliated companies
within a larger organization, especially affiliates that are located in a different jurisdiction.
Some firms restrict the sharing of customer information outside the organization, and
customers may opt out of allowing a firm to provide their information to third-party
companies.

Compliance staff should be sufficiently independent of the lines of business they support to
minimize potential conflicts of interest. Their compensation structures should not
compromise their autonomy and their ability to exercise independent and impartial judgment.

Although the compliance staff may reside within the line of business and report to line
management, they should feel comfortable escalating issues to a compliance or risk
management function outside the line of business without fear of recrimination. A close
working relationship between compliance staff and the line of business is crucial to a
successful compliance program. The compliance staff members should be considered trusted
advisors to whom the business-line staff can come when they have questions and need to seek
advice.

Sanctions compliance programs should include a whistleblower policy and program. A
whistleblower is a person who exposes activity or information taking place within a firm that
is illegal, unethical, or otherwise noncompliant. An established whistleblower program should
bea core aspect of a sanctions compliance program, providing an anonymous channel through
which to escalate identified issues. It also should establish a policy of non-retaliation for the
identification and exposure of issues.

The whistleblower program should be part of the firm’s code of conduct and should be
included as a regular part of training. Employees should understand how the whistleblower
process works. Often this takes the form of a hotline managed by an external third party and
routed internally to the proper escalation channels.

CGSS Page 54
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE: SWITZERLAND’S BSI BANK, 2016

CASE SUMMARY

On May 24, 2016, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) announced that it ordered
Switzerland’s BS] Bank to shut down its operations as a merchant bank in Singapore for
serious breaches of AML requirements, poor management oversight of the bank’s operations,
and gross misconduct by some of the bank’s staff. MAS also served BSI Bank notice that it
would impose financial penalties amounting to SG$13.3 million for breaches of its Prevention
of Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism requirements.

The breaches include failures to perform enhanced customer due diligence on high-risk
accounts and to monitor for suspicious customer transactions on an ongoing basis. Six
members of BSI Bank’s senior management and staff, including its chief executive, deputy
chief executive, and wealth management head were referred to the public prosecutor for
possible criminal offenses.*+

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Senior management is liable and can be implicated in criminal proceedings when an
organization is found to be in breach of compliance requirements.

> Effective risk assessment and customer due diligence is key to mitigating compliance risk
exposure.

> Transaction monitoring must be implemented in sucha way that suspicious transactions
do not go unnoticed.

Regulator Expectations

Understanding what is legally required of your institution, employees, and customers is
essential to a successful sanctions compliance program. It is also important to understand the
expectations of the relevant regulators and/or supervisory authorities.

Financial regulators have established expectations for effective sanctions compliance
programs. Examples of these expectations include:

e Bedemonstrably aware of international sanctions obligations.
e Becompliant at all times with the applicable sanctions requirements.
e Focus on implementing appropriate systems and controls to mitigate sanctions risks.

e Implement appropriate measures to ensure asset freezing and account blocking controls
are applied effectively.

 

44 Monetary Authority of Singapore, “MAS directs BSI Bank to shut down in Singapore,” May 24, 2016.

CGSS Page 55
Version 1.531
e Do not ignore “low-risk” areas or assume there are no sanctions risks present.

e Do not rely on intermediaries or other financial institutions to screen customers they have
referred without first verifying such screening has occurred.

e Review outsourcing partners who assist in the management of sanctions risk, (e.g., parties
who conduct screening and investigations).

e Ensure that employee sanctions training includes “red flags.”
e Periodically test sanctions controls to ensure they are fit for their purpose and not being

circumvented by staff members.

Regulators typically issue new rules or clarify existing rules when they observe deficiencies in
sanctions compliance programs. For example, in January 2017 the NYDFS issued a rule
clarifying that banks must regularly test their “watch list filtering program.” The notice
describing this new rule outlined deficiencies the regulator had observed concerning
sanctions screening, such as:

e Insufficient capacity to assess alerts

e Filtering criteria that were too loose, generating excessive false positives

e Filtering criteria that were too strict, potentially missing real hits (false negatives)

e Excluding transactions from the filtering process without first assessing risk

e Watch-list filtering not carried out frequently and not clearly scheduled

e Parties on suppression lists not screened periodically or when changes were made to lists

e Up-to-date sanctions lists not used in screening

The key regulatory expectation is that any internal lists (e.g., exclusions lists and inequalities
lists) must be reviewed, corrected, and updated so that actual sanctions targets in the
screening process are not missed. The OFAC 2015 Guidance concerning internal lists states
that these lists should be reviewed on a periodic basis when: changes are made to existing
sanctions target listing information; there is an update of regulatory sanctions programs (e.g.,
revocation of general licenses, new programs, enhanced restrictions imposed); and changes
are made to a customer’s information.

CGSS Page 56
Version 1.531
As a best practice standard, firms should:

e Screen databases each time a relevant regulator (UN, EU, OFAC, etc.) introduces, updates,
or renews the inclusion of targets, legislation, or regulations, and also when targets are
removed from lists.

e Establish a process that screens all financial flows (incoming and outgoing funds, financial
instruments, and economic resources).

e Establish a process to ensure the effectiveness of automated screening tools (ASTs) data
quality, AST settings, and frequency of screening.

Sanctions are generally strict liability, and the regulatory expectation is that transactions will
be screened prior to their execution. This is commonly referred to as “real-time” screening or
filtering (as used within DFS Part 504). Real-time screening may be manual or automated (i.e.,
using ASTs). Moreover, there is a regulatory expectation that financial institutions undertake
batch screening. Batch screening is a process of screening a firm’s entire customer base and
other associated entities, such as vendors, with ASTs on a periodic basis. Although the
frequency of batch screening is generally based on an organization’s sanctions risk
assessment, it is typically performed daily or when there is an update to a sanctions list. Batch
screening should also include the screening of any internal lists that an organization
maintains. The goal is to ensure that an organization is alerted as soon as possible to a change
in the sanctions risks associated with one of its existing customers.

Risk Assessment

Risk assessments are a common practice for organizations, especially financial institutions. A
risk assessment may assess, among others, credit risk, operational risk, and compliance risk.
In assessing compliance risk, one risk assessment that should be conducted is sanctions risk. A
sanctions risk assessment is the foundation of a sound sanctions compliance program.
However, within a sanctions compliance program, financial institutions cannot avoid all risk
when it comes to doing business. So it is important that they take a risk-based approach. A risk
assessment is an important tool that allows a business to identify and assess the extent to
which it may be exposed to risk. In global banking, risk assessments form the foundation ofa
sound sanctions compliance program. A well-planned and well-formulated risk assessment
allows a business to understand its risk profile and then determine its risk appetite for
undertaking business in situations in which there could be an elevated sanctions risk.

CGSS Page 57
Version 1.531
According to the Wolfsberg Group, an association of 13 global banks that develops
frameworks and guidance for managing financial crime risks, the key purpose ofa risk
assessment is to drive improvements in financial crime risk management through identifying:

e The general and specific sanctions risks a financial institution is facing

e The ways in which these risks are mitigated by a firm’s sanctions compliance program
controls

e Any additional controls to mitigate the residual risk that remains for the institution

The sanctions risk assessment should be conducted regularly (generally every 12 to 18
months) to ensure that sanctions risks are effectively identified and appropriately mitigated.
Some regulators require an institution to conduct a sanctions risk assessment when they issue
a consent order related to sanctions compliance failings.

RISK APPETITE

Conducting a risk assessment helps a business determine its risk appetite, or the amount of
risk that a firm is willing to accept in pursuit of value or opportunity. A firm’s risk appetite
reflects its risk management philosophy and comfort level for undertaking business in
situations in which there could be an elevated sanctions risk. In turn, risk appetite influences
the firm’s culture and operating style and guides resource allocation. An organization’s risk
appetite is determined through the risk-assessment process and formalized in a Risk Appetite
Statement or Framework. A Risk Appetite Statement is a statement of the level and type of risk
that the organization is willing to take in order to meet its objectives, whereas a Risk Appetite
Framework provides a structured approach to how risk is managed, measured, and
controlled.*5 A business should determine its risk appetite based on the resources it has to
invest in controls, staffing, and measures to protect its reputation. Firms can have an
overarching risk appetite (i.e., enterprise-wide) and/or have risk appetites defined ona more
granular level (i.e., by department).

Regulators frequently expect businesses to be able to explain how they decide what types of
customers to accept, based on the level of sanctions risk they have determined they can
manage.

Initially the business needs to determine what it considers to be high, medium, and low risk—
for customers, products and services, countries, and delivery channels.

The board of directors, or its equivalent, often will set limits and thresholds on the percentage
of high-risk customers the firm can accept without receiving additional approval from the
board. Keep in mind that what is considered high risk for AML purposes may not necessarily
be considered high risk for sanctions compliance, and vice versa. This principle also applies to

 

45 The Risk Management Association, A Framework for Setting Risk Appetite, 2013.

CGSS Page 58
Version 1.531
low risk. One mistake some firms make is using their AML country risk ratings for their
sanctions risk assessment, which can lead to inaccurate results.

In short, when a business determines its risk appetite, it is identifying its comfort level based
on the resources it has to invest in controls, staffing, and measures to protect its reputation.

RISK FORMULA: INHERENT RISK, CONTROL EFFECTIVENESS, AND
RESIDUAL RISK

The risk assessment formula shown in Figure 2 is a common formula that is suggested by the
Wolfsberg Group.

Figure 2: Risk Assessment Formula

Inherent risk — —_ Residual risk

 

KYC/CDD Sanctions due diligence

—_/

Inherent Risks

Inherent risk is the level of sanctions risk that exists before controls are applied to mitigate
them. There are four main inherent risk categories: customers, products and services,
countries, and delivery channels. You may notice that the categories of risk are similar to those
considered in AML and terrorist financing risk assessments. Inherent risk is often the starting
point ofa risk assessment and considers the likelihood and impact (severity) of
noncompliance prior to considering any mitigating effects of risk management processes.

CGSS Page 59
Version 1.531
Figure 3 illustrates the inherent risk matrix: the level of risk increases as the probability and
severity increase. If there is a high probability that a violation will occur, and if the impact of
the violation is high, the inherent risk is high.

Figure 3: Inherent Risk Matrix

HIGH

    

Inherent risk

Impact of violation

LOW
LOW HIGH

Probability of occurrence

Customers

Customer risk refers to the types of customers whose characteristics could expose your
business to a lesser or greater degree to sanctions compliance risks. The key element is the
extent to which the identity of a customer—and in the case ofa legal entity such as a company,
its beneficial owners and controllers—can be confirmed. This aspect of inherent risk also
includes the ease with which the financial institution can identify the nature of a customer’s
business, the goods and services it provides, and the jurisdictions in which it undertakes that
business. Sanctions evasion can be facilitated when customers conceal their identity or
activities, use complex legal entities with a number of different companies, and use shell
companies or bearer shares. These characteristics can increase the inherent sanctions risks to
the business.

Products and Services

Products and services refers to the extent to which a bank’s product or service could be used
by the customer in a way that exposes the bank to a lesser or greater degree of sanctions
compliance risks. The inherent risks of products and services in relation to sanctions generally

CGSS Page 60
Version 1.531
increase with international and cross-border features, such as foreign correspondent banking,
as opposed to domestic correspondent banking.

Products and services risk typically arises when a customer misuses a product to evade
sanctions, for example with international funds transfers, letters of credit, correspondent
banking accounts, and—in particular—payable-through accounts.

The level of products and services risk can be elevated when product ownership is transferred
without the knowledge of the financial institution. For example, pre-paid cards are versatile
and allow users to reload them remotely. Users can reload them with cash and other online
services without revealing their identity. In addition, these cards are very portable and can
hold $10,000 or more, depending on the card.

Virtual currencies also pose a sanctions risk. Virtual currencies are unregulated, digital money
developed by private companies and used by a defined community. Cryptocurrency is a type
of virtual currency that is associated with anonymity and the encryption or lack of end-user
information, such as the originator and beneficiary of a transaction. These types of currency
pose a challenge to sanctions regimes that are founded on knowing who is transacting.

On March 19, 2018, OFAC announced plans to possibly include specific cryptocurrency
addresses associated with blocked persons as identifiers on the Specially Designated Nationals
list in an attempt to strengthen efforts against the illicit cryptocurrency transactions. In April
2019, researchers at the Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) showed that the exploitation of
bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies for illicit activities gave a so-called “financial lifeline” to
North Korea in its attempts to develop weapons of mass destruction. Because these currencies
can be used across regions and borders, they can be attractive to those who might aim to
evade financial sanctions.*6

Internet-based products and services also can pose a higher risk because of the speed of
payment processing and the anonymity provided in accessing an account. In addition, services
such as trade financing (in which export and/or import activities, especially those linked to
free trade zones, can involve prohibited or dual-use goods) can also increase a customer’s
sanctions risk. There are many dual-use goods, so it is important to check whether the product
might bear a risk in this regard. For example, a client that is engaged in the import and export
of medical supplies may require financing for the export of medical equipment to a high-risk
country. Although most sanctions include exemptions for medical and other humanitarian
purposes, this medical equipment could contain lasers, which can be used for military
purposes as well, thus turning an apparently low-risk activity into a high-risk activity.

 

46 Anthony Cuthbertson, “North Korea Using Cryptocurrency to Fund Nuclear Weapons Development,
Report Warns,” The Independent, April 22, 2019.

CGSS Page 61
Version 1.531
Countries

Country risk can seem complex to assess. For example, in the case of North Korea, the country
itself is likely to be a red flag. But many countries have political and/or economic relationships
with sanctioned countries. Turkey, for example, although it is not highly sanctioned, is known
to be an entry point for foreign fighters, money, and goods passing into Syria, and for financing
terrorism. Japan, which also is not highly sanctioned, at one point was buying Iranian oil but
does not share a border or a deep cultural relationship with Iran. Certain provinces of China
that border North Korea are at high risk for smuggled money and goods from North Korea.
The United Arab Emirates is a short boat trip from Iran and a known transshipment point for
goods heading to Iran. Therefore, the country risk area requires careful consideration beyond
whether a country is the subject of sanctions restrictions and beyond the country’s AML risk,
which often is factored inas a component of sanctions risk. In the context of country risk, it is
important to understand any indirect risks that could emerge as a result of further
transactions into sanctioned countries, for example, while products move down the supply
chain, and to assess what the risk exposure would be in this regard. This situation may also
depend on whether an institution is providing long-term or short-term financing.

Additionally, financial institutions often serve as financial intermediaries for their customers,
facilitating transactions between customers and counterparties. The country risk component
of the risk assessment should include an assessment of the country risk for those third
countries in which the customers’ counterparties are located. This element of the risk
assessment is generally linked to the value and volume of transactions to any one country.

Delivery Channels

Delivery channels are the ways in which products and services are provided by a firm to its
customer (also referred to as servicing methods and distribution channels). For example,
reliance upon brokers, intermediaries, and other independent third parties poses a higher
sanctions risk than when a business interacts directly with customers and suppliers. Similarly,
ifa firm relies on affiliates’ due diligence, especially if those affiliates are in jurisdictions with
lower compliance standards, the absence of face-to-face onboarding presents a higher risk
than when customers are onboarded directly or through a domestic affiliate. Other delivery
methods without face-to-face onboarding, such as internet banking and money services
businesses, are also considered to pose a higher inherent sanctions risk. Finally, a delivery
channel that processes payments quickly is a higher risk, because there is less time for
potential investigation. As an example, compare a traditional international wire transfer to an
international automated clearing house (ACH) payment. The ACH payment is a higher risk due
to the speed of the delivery channel.

CGSS Page 62
Version 1.531
Control Effectiveness

After assessing inherent risks, businesses must identify the controls they have in place to
mitigate or reduce inherent risks. Control effectiveness (also referred to as mitigation
measures or quality of risk management) is the measurement of the quality of controls used to
mitigate a business’s inherent risks. These controls should be both appropriate and effective
to mitigate the identified sanctions risks. That is, they must be proportionate: where there is
an elevated risk, the controls should be more comprehensive to mitigate that risk.

The following is a list of the controls used within a sanctions compliance program:

e Governance

e Policies and procedures

e Know your customer/due diligence (including beneficial ownership)

e Management information

e Recordkeeping and retention

e Sanctions blocks/rejections

e Monitoring

e Training and awareness

e Independent testing

For example, inherent customer risk can be reduced through comprehensive know your
customer (KYC) procedures to identify customers, their owners and controllers, and the
nature and purpose of their business. These procedures could require the provision of certain
types of records, such as license authorizations, during the onboarding process. This

procedure would then reduce the risk, for example, of providing trade financing for the export
of a product that is restricted under a sanction.

Each of the controls listed above can help to mitigate the inherent risk levels initially assessed,
thus permitting the financial institution to identify which areas of its business appear to pose
higher levels of sanctions risk.

Residual Risk

The business’ risk appetite is significant when assessing residual risk. At this stage in the
assessment process, the institution can identify which areas of business are considered high
risk after establishing control effectiveness. A business has four options for managing the
remaining, or residual, risks:

1. Itcan transfer the risk. However, because a firm cannot transfer accountability for
sanctions compliance to someone else, this is not always a good option. Ifa firm assigns

CGSS Page 63
Version 1.531
responsibility to a vendor or another third party, the firm must ensure the vendor is
qualified and has effective controls.

2. Itcan avoid the risk. Ifthe level of risk exceeds its risk appetite, the firm may decide to
discontinue or fail to pursue a given line of products, or decide not to accept business
relationships with customers who, for example, undertake business in certain countries.

3. Itcan seek to further mitigate the risk by, for example, decreasing “fuzzy logic” thresholds,
increasing monitoring, adopting other controls, and/or strengthening current controls to
manage the risk.

4. Itcan accept the risk.

Figure 4 illustrates the residual risk matrix: the residual risk increases as control effectiveness
weakens (e.g., via the loss of strong compliance professionals) or as inherent risk increases
(e.g., the firm launches a high-risk product without competent staff to mitigate the risk).

Figure 4: Residual Risk Matrix

HIGH

    

Residual risk

Inherent risk

Low
STRONG WEAK

Control effectiveness

Good and Poor Practices

There are a number of good and poor practice examples applicable to conducting sanctions
risk assessments, as shown in Table 5.

Table 5: Sanctions Risk Assessment: Good and Poor Practices

 

Sanctions Risk Assessment: Good and Poor Practices

 

CGSS Page 64
Version 1.531
 

Good Practices e Conducta risk assessment that is suited to the business’ size and
complexity.

e Account for customers’ directors and beneficial owners.

e Record the methodology and procedures used.

e Validate the accuracy of the data.

e Include a mixture of both qualitative and quantitative analysis.

e Use the same methodology for each risk assessment.

 

 

 

 

Additionally, risk assessments may be conducted on various assessment units. For smaller
institutions, the various risk categories and controls can be assessed for the entirety ofthe
institution under one assessment unit, for example, the branch. As institutions grow in size
and complexity, the number of units and the granularity within the assessment units may
grow and become more complex. For example, assessment units can be established by a line of
business, with all businesses contributing to the overall risk assessment for the larger
financial institution. This process can continue if that larger institution is part of a global
parent company that conducts an enterprise-wide risk assessment. Determining the
assessment units, their granularity and complexity, and how they combine with one another is
important for an accurate and thorough risk assessment. Often larger, global financial
institutions struggle as their various connected entities conduct risk assessments using
different methodologies. An important component of conducting risk assessments is
consistency. For this reason, the Wolfsberg Group recommends that any changes to the
underlying risk assessment methodology be clearly documented and explained. Otherwise,
significant changes in the risk assessment results (i.e., inherent risk, control effectiveness, and
residual risk) can result without context to understand the direction in which the risk is
trending.

According to OFAC’s A Framework for OFAC Compliance Commitments’, organizations
should conduct a routine and, ifappropriate, ongoing risk assessment. Although the document
acknowledges that there is no “one size fits all” risk assessment, the exercise should generally
consist of a holistic review of the organization from top to bottom to assess its touchpoints to
the outside world. This process allows the organization to identify potential areas in which it

 

47 US Department of the Treasury, “OFAC Issues a Framework for Compliance Commitments,” May 2,
2019.

CGSS Page 65
Version 1.531
may, directly or indirectly, engage with OFAC-prohibited persons, parties, countries, and/or
regions. For example, an organization’s SCP may include an assessment of the following:

e Its customers, supply chains, intermediaries, and counterparties

e The products and services it offers, including how and where such items fit into other
financial or commercial products, services, networks, and/or systems

e The geographic locations of the organization, as well as its customers, supply chains,
intermediaries, and counterparties

Risk assessments and sanctions-related due diligence procedures also are important during
mergers and acquisitions, particularly in scenarios involving non-US companies or
corporations.

Staying Current on Sanctions

Sanctions are continually changing, and effectively monitoring these changes mitigates the
risk inherent in this change. That means practitioners must work to stay informed regarding
the global political climate. Keeping current can include requiring vendors to provide updated
lists (although this method is not completely reliable), monitoring government websites
through subscriptions, and creating tailored news alerts. An example of creating a tailored
news alert is entering “sanctions” AND “Iran” in a Google news feed. Another useful resource is
the ACAMS newsletter moneylaundering.com.

The following is an example of the changing nature of sanctions: In July of 2015, the P5+1
(China, France, Germany, Russia, the UK, and the United States) worked with Iran to reach a
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA came into effect on January 16, 2016,
while President Obama was still in office in the United States. The presidential election later
that year ushered ina new president and a new political party. President Trump terminated
the country’s participation in the JCPOA effective May of 2018. Even still, the administration
provided temporary waivers to a limited number of countries to buy Iranian oil. This example
highlights the fact that sanctions are largely a matter of foreign policy, changing as political
figures and parties leave and come into power.

It is also important to stay abreast of current changes facing the European sanctions regime.
The European Commission has published a Sanctions Map‘®, which provides useful
background and up-to-date information on the current status of its regime. The same website
offers guidance on the implementation of measures in relation to the different sanctions
regimes, such as Syria and Crimea/Sevastopol.

 

48 EU Sanctions Map.

CGSS Page 66
Version 1.531
The UN Security Council website is also an important source of information, as the Council can
resort to imposing sanctions and even authorize the use of force to maintain or restore
international peace and security.’? Following UN Security Council press releases is a useful
way to keep abreast of global security developments and changes to the UN consolidated
sanctions list.

OFAC administers sanctions programs that include both comprehensive and selective
sanctions, “using the blocking of assets and trade restrictions to accomplish foreign policy and
national security goals.” You can check the OFAC website for additional information and
register for Recent Action updates.

Policies, Procedures, and Internal Controls

An effective sanctions compliance program should include internal controls, including written
policies and procedures, in order to identify, interdict, escalate, report (as appropriate), and
maintain records pertaining to any activity that may be prohibited according to relevant
regulations and legislation.

Internal controls should outline roles and responsibilities, set clear expectations, define
procedures and processes, and minimize the risks identified in the sanctions compliance risk
assessment.

Policies and procedures should clearly state disciplinary measures for noncompliance and be
enforced. Sanctions compliance programs should include a process for self-identifying
weaknesses outside of the regular risk assessment. Identification of weaknesses provides
evidence of a culture of compliance. They should be documented (including through root
cause analysis of any compliance breaches) and remediated in order to prevent activities that
could violate the sanctions programs administered by OFAC.

Given the dynamic nature of sanctions regimes, SCPs need to be capable of adjusting rapidly to
any changes, such as:

e Updates to OFAC’s Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) and Sectoral Sanctions
Identifications (SSI) lists

e Updates to any EU lists

 

49 United Nations Security Council.

CGSS Page 67
Version 1.531
e Updates to any other lists

e Prohibitions imposed on targeted foreign countries, governments, regions, and persons
through the enactment of (1) new legislation; (2) issuance of new executive orders,
regulations, or guidance published; and (3) issuance of general licenses by OFAC.5°

The establishment and continual development ofa financial institution’s policies, procedures,
and controls form the foundation ofa successful sanctions compliance program. Together,
these three parts define and support the entire program, as well as serve as a blueprint for
how an institution fulfills its regulatory requirements. All three parts should be designed to
mitigate the identified risks and take into account the applicable laws and regulations with
which the financial institution must comply. They should clearly indicate the risk appetite of
the business; in other words, what risks the business is prepared to accept and which it is not
willing to accept.

Table 6 compares sanctions compliance policies, procedures, and controls.

Table 6: Sanctions Compliance Policies, Procedures, and Internal Controls

 

Sanctions Compliance Policies, Procedures, and Internal Controls

 

Policies e Clear and simple high-level statements that are uniform across the
entire organization (sets the tone from the top)

e Define roles and responsibilities
e Approved by executive management or the board of directors

e Reflect the high-level responsibilities of the stakeholders
throughout the organization

e Establish minimum standards and requirements that must be met

 

Procedures e Translate the sanctions compliance policies into an acceptable and
workable practice, tasking the stakeholders with their respective
responsibilities

e May be established at the operational (not executive) level of the
financial institution

e Serve as the instructions for how an institution expects something
to be done

 

 

 

 

 

50 US Department of the Treasury, “OFAC Issues a Framework for Compliance Commitments,” May 2,
2019.

CGSS Page 68
Version 1.531
 

e Much more detailed than sanctions compliance policies

e Reviewed and updated regularly

 

Internal Controls e The internal technology or tools the financial institution utilizes to
ensure the sanctions compliance program is functioning as intended
and within predefined parameters

e Identify, interdict, escalate, report, and maintain records

e Alert sanctions compliance team to potential outliers or deviations
from normal policy that may need to be reviewed

e Includes management reports, automated review systems, and the
utilization of multiple reviewers

 

 

 

 

Although many internal controls are applied by the first line of defense (i.e., the employees
who are responsible for onboarding customers), every employee throughout a financial
institution, at all levels ofthe organization, must contribute to the creation, maintenance, and
overall success of the compliance program.

It is critical for larger financial institutions to adopt an enterprise-wide approach that allows
for consistency in the manner in which the institution manages its compliance risk. At the
same time, it is necessary to accommodate regional and/or business line-specific
requirements. For example, enterprise-wide compliance risk models in financial institutions
that operate in multiple regions and/or countries must reflect the local regulatory
requirements. This can be achieved by having a different version of the compliance program
or by having country-specific addenda to the global program.

Foreign or overseas branches of financial institutions should also adopt the stricter
requirements (both regulatory and internal policy) of their head offices when there are
differences in the levels of rigor between the regulatory regimes. For example, if the head
office’s jurisdiction requires batch screening ona weekly basis and the foreign branch’s
jurisdiction requires batch screening on a quarterly basis, then the foreign branch should
conduct batch screening ona weekly basis.

While this same principle does not necessarily apply in regard to head offices adopting the
stricter regulatory requirements of their foreign branches, head offices should at the very least
consider variances in requirements for adoption as a matter of effective risk management.

Key internal sanctions compliance policies should be established and approved by executive
management and the board of directors. These policies set the tone for the organization.
Although the organization’s policy may be a high-level statement of principles, it serves as the
basis for procedures and controls that provide details concerning how lines of business will
comply with laws, regulations, and the organization’s compliance policies.

CGSS Page 69
Version 1.531
The standard sanctions compliance operating procedures should be drafted at the operational
level of the financial institution. These procedures must be modified and updated, as needed,
to reflect changes in laws, regulations, and products, as well as organizational changes. These
procedures are more detailed than the corresponding compliance policies; they translate
policy into acceptable and workable practices. The procedures also form the basis of an
important component of sanctions compliance training and compliance monitoring programs.
One example is using procedures that identify customers, their owners and/or controllers, and
the nature and purpose of their businesses to reduce customer risk. Another example is
procedures that require the provision of certain types of records, such as license
authorizations, during the onboarding process to reduce the risk of providing trade financing
for the export of a product that is restricted under a sanction.

In addition to policies and procedures, institutions must establish processes to support and
facilitate the effective implementation of procedures. Although policies and procedures
provide important guidance, the sanctions compliance program also relies on a variety of
internal controls, including management reports and other built-in safeguards, which keep the
program working effectively. These internal controls should enable the compliance
organization to recognize deviations from standard procedures and safety protocols. A matter
as simple as requiring a corporate officer’s approval or two signatures for transactions that
exceed a prescribed amount could reflect a critical internal control element that, if ignored,
seriously weakens an institution’s compliance program and attracts unwanted attention from
supervisory authorities. Similarly, a second review and approval of actions considered to be
departures from policy can be helpful if subsequent questions arise. Other effective controls
use technology, such as account opening systems that force the entry of required information
and automated account monitoring programs.

Sanctions compliance programs should be in writing and include the policies, procedures, and
controls that are designed to prevent, detect, and deter sanctions evasions and violations,
including how the institution will:

e Identify high-risk operations (products, services, delivery channels, customers, and
geographic locations).

e Provide for regular updates to the institution’s risk profile and ensure that the sanctions
compliance program is tailored to manage the institution’s risk exposure. Immediate
action is required when sanctions regimes and other relevant legislation are updated or
revised in any way.

e Inform the board of directors (or a committee of the board) and senior management of
compliance initiatives, known compliance deficiencies, blocked or rejected transactions,
and corrective actions taken.

e Develop and maintain a system of metrics reporting that provides accurate and timely
information on the status of the sanctions compliance program, including statistics on key
elements of the program, such as the number of transactions monitored, alerts generated,
cases created, and transactions that have been blocked or rejected.

CGSS Page 70
Version 1.531
e Assign clear accountability for performance of duties within the compliance program.

e Provide for program continuity despite changes in management and/or employee
composition or structure.

e Meet all regulatory requirements and recommendations for sanctions compliance.

e Implement risk-based sanctions compliance CDD policies, procedures, and processes.

e Provide for dual controls and segregation of duties.

e Comply with all record-keeping requirements, including retention and retrieval of records.

e Provide sufficient controls and monitoring systems for the timely detection and reporting
of potentially suspicious activity, including a procedure for recording the rationale for not
reporting activity as a result of the findings of any investigation.

e Establish clear accountability lines and responsibilities to ensure that there is appropriate
and effective oversight of staff who engage in activities that may pose a greater sanctions
compliance risk.

e Establish training requirements and standards to ensure that employees understand the
procedures they need to follow, including their relevance to mitigating compliance risks in
their departments or areas of responsibility.

e Clearly explain the importance of reporting suspicious activity, how and to whom
concerns should be raised, the role of the compliance officer, and what the “tipping off”
restriction means in practice. A sanctions compliance program may interdict a transaction
for various reasons, some out of an abundance of caution and some due to actual matches
against a sanctions list. Although not all interdicted transactions require an STR, processes
and protocols should be in place to ensure that transactions that violate or attempt to
circumvent the AML laws are reviewed by the AML function for suspicious activity. A
single transaction with “IRAN” in the country code may not be a violation of AML laws
requiring an STR, but multiple transactions that attempt to hide the final destination most
likely would be.

e Incorporate into all job descriptions and performance review processes the requirement
to comply at all times with policies and procedures related to sanctions compliance.
Noncompliance with these should be managed in accordance with existing disciplinary
processes.

e Develop and implement screening programs to ensure high standards when hiring
employees.

e Implement appropriate disciplinary action for employees who consistently fail to perform
in accordance with the sanctions compliance program.

e Develop and implement quality assurance testing programs to assess the effectiveness of
the compliance program’s implementation and execution of its requirements. This is

CGSS Page 71
Version 1.531
separate from the independent audit requirement but serves a similar purpose—to assess
the ongoing effectiveness of the program.

The level of sophistication a financial institution needs to maintain concerning its policies,
procedures, and internal controls directly correlates to the institution’s size, structure, risk,
and complexity of products, amongst other items. Failures to establish, perform, follow, and
maintain adequate policies, procedures, and controls can lead to severe enforcements against
the institution or designated individuals involved.

CASE EXAMPLE: STATE STREET BANK AND TRUST, 2015

CASE SUMMARY

In May 2019, OFAC issued a Finding of Violation with no monetary penalty against State Street
Bank and Trust (SSBT) for payments made under an employee retirement plan. SSBT, acting
as trustee, made 45 pension payments totaling $11,365.44 to a plan participant who was a US
citizen with a US bank account, but who resided in Tehran, Iran.>4

All of these transactions caused alerts within SSBT’s own centralized system. However, SSBT
used Retiree Service Staff (RSS) within the first-line business unit to manage the company’s
relationship with the retirement plan. RSS had its own sanctions screening tool and did not
utilize SSBT’s centralized screening tool. Moreover, RSS’s escalation protocols dictated that
potential sanctions matches be escalated to business-aligned compliance staff rather than
SSBT’s centralized sanctions compliance specialists.

After learning of and reporting the transactions, SSBT modified its sanctions compliance
program to screen retirement plan payments through its centralized screening system.
Potential matches with a sanctions nexus are now handled through SSBT’s central alert
dispositioning process with escalation protocols to its centralized sanctions compliance
specialists.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Organizations should ensure that policies and procedures are applicable to the entire
organization in relation to sanctions compliance and that any deviations are understood
and documented.

> Organizations should establish clear escalation procedures for sanctions issues to ensure
they are reviewed and considered by appropriate personnel.

> Organizations should consider hiring sanctions specialists, especially when their business
is large and complex, instead of compliance generalists.

 

51US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for May 28, 2019.

CGSS Page 72
Version 1.531
Testing and Auditing

Audits assess the effectiveness of current processes and identify any inconsistencies between
the policies and day-to-day operations. Comprehensive and objective testing or audit function
within a sanctions compliance program ensures that an organization can rectify any
weaknesses or deficiencies that are identified. Necessary updates can include improving
and/or recalibrating elements of the sanctions compliance program to account for any shifting
risks or changes to the sanctions environment. Testing and auditing can be conducted ona
specific element of a sanctions compliance program or at the enterprise-wide level.52

Establishing your sanctions compliance program and putting it into motion is not enough. The
program must then be monitored and evaluated. Institutions should assess their compliance
programs regularly to ensure their effectiveness and identify any new risk factors.

The audit must be independent (i.e., performed by people who are not involved with the
organization’s compliance staff), and the individuals who conduct the audit should report
directly to the board of directors or a designated board committee that is composed primarily
or completely of outside directors. Auditors must be sufficiently qualified to ensure that their
findings and conclusions are reliable. Depending on the jurisdiction, the independent audit
may also be referred to as the independent test or independent review.

The independent audit should accomplish the following:

e Assess the overall integrity and effectiveness of the sanctions compliance program,
including policies, procedures, and processes.

e Assess the adequacy of the sanctions compliance risk assessment.

e Examine the adequacy of sanctions due diligence policies, procedures, and processes,
including whether they comply with regulatory requirements.

e Determine the level of personnel adherence to the institution’s sanctions compliance
policies, procedures, and processes.

e Perform appropriate transaction testing, with particular emphasis on high-risk operations
(products, services, customers, and geographic locations).

e Assess training adequacy, including its comprehensiveness, accuracy of materials, training
schedule, attendance tracking, and escalation procedures for lack of attendance.

e Assess compliance with applicable sanctions regimes based on the jurisdictions in which
the organization conducts business.

e Examine the integrity and accuracy of management information systems used in the
compliance program. This may include assessing the adequacy of the scope of any third-

 

52 US Department of the Treasury, “OFAC Issues a Framework for Compliance Commitments,” May 2,
2019.

CGSS Page 73
Version 1.531
party independent system validations and the qualifications of parties engaged to perform
such reviews.

e Review all of the aspects of the sanctions compliance functions that have been outsourced
to third parties, including the qualifications of the personnel, the contract, and the
performance and reputation of the company.

e Evaluate the ability of sanctions screening/filtering software applications to identify
unusual
activity by:

— Checking data records, including the names and other identifying information, against
official sanctions lists and internal sanctions-related watchlists

— Reviewing policies, procedures, and processes for monitoring sanctions evasions

— Reviewing the processes for ensuring the completeness, accuracy, and timeliness of
the data supplied by the source transaction processing systems

— Evaluating the methodology for establishing and analyzing filtering criteria

— Evaluating the filtering matrix that provides the list of messages /payments that are
subject to sanctions filtering

e Review case and information management, including the:

— Number of potential matches identified through screening and filtering within a
defined period

— Number of false positives and true matches identified within a defined period

— Number oftransactions and payments that have been rejected or frozen as a result of
sanctions compliance

— Details of updates to the screening tool that have been implemented
— Details of any external reporting to sanctions authorities

e Assess the adequacy of record keeping and record-retention processes. This should
include the:

— Date and time of receipt of new/updated sanctions lists and updates to the screening
tool

— Date and time at which new/updated sanctions lists were screened against the
counterparties (and related parties, when relevant), vendors, transactions, and
payments

e Track previously identified deficiencies and ensure they were promptly corrected by
management.

CGSS Page 74
Version 1.531
e Note concerns related to the data quality of the incoming and outgoing payment messages,
of the source systems, and of the screening and filtering tools, which can impact the
reliability of sanctions controls and any mitigating actions.

e Determine ifthe audit’s overall coverage and frequency is appropriate for the
organization’s risk profile.

e Ensure, in coordination with the board or designated board committee, that overall audit
coverage and frequency are appropriate for the risk profile of the organization.

e Assess if the board of directors was responsive to previous audit findings.

e Determine the adequacy of the following, as they relate to the training program and
materials:

— The importance that the board and senior management personnel place on ongoing
education, training, and compliance

— Employee accountability for ensuring sanctions compliance, including the employee
performance management process

— Comprehensiveness of training, related to the risk assessment of each individual
business
line

— Training of personnel from all applicable areas of the institution

— Frequency of training, including the timeliness of training given to new and
transferred employees

— Coverage of internal policies, procedures, processes, and new rules and regulations
— Coverage of different forms of sanctions as they relate to identifying suspicious activity

— Disciplinary actions taken for noncompliance with internal policies and regulatory
requirements

An effective internal audit department develops and maintains an audit risk assessment to
determine audit priorities. It also develops and maintains detailed audit testing programs for
every area. All audit and regulatory recommendations for corrective action must identify the
target date for completion and the personnel responsible, and the audit department must
track its progress. Regular status reports should be provided to senior management and the
board of directors, as well as to supervisory authorities upon request. Failure to properly
address audit issues is a frequent criticism in cases in which regulators levy fines on
institutions.

CASE EXAMPLE: UNICREDIT BANK AG, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

CGSS Page 75
Version 1.531
In 2019, UniCredit Bank AG, a financial institution headquartered in Munich, was fined by the
US authorities for illegally moving hundreds of millions of dollars through the US financial
system on behalf of sanctioned entities in restricted countries including Iran, Libya, and Cuba,
and then working to cover its tracks to avoid detection. Regulators claimed that UniCredit
Bank AG disguised transactions between 2002 and 2011, in part by stripping words such as
Sudan and Tehran from payment messages to New York financial institutions. The settlements
in this case related to apparent violations of sanctions targeting proliferators of weapons of
mass destruction, global terrorism, and the countries of Iran, Myanmar, Cuba, Libya, Sudan,
and Syria.

For a period of five years, beginning 180 days after the date the agreement was executed, a
senior-level executive or manager of UniCredit Bank AG was required to submit a certification
to OFAC confirming that UniCredit had implemented and continued to maintain the sanctions
compliance measures as committed above.

In addition to UniCredit Bank AG, 10 banks have been penalized by US and Manhattan
authorities over the past decade for sanctions-related violations. France’s BNP Paribas SA
pleaded guilty in 2014 and paid a record $8.9 billion penalty. Other banks settled with much
lower penalties and deferred prosecution agreements, including Amsterdam-based ING Bank,
which paid $619 million in 2012, and Zurich-based Credit Suisse Group AG, which paid $536
million in 2009. The Standard Chartered settlement was in addition to the $667 million the
bank paid US authorities in 2012 and another $300 million penalty in 2014 related to
surveillance shortcomings.53, 54,55

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Organizations should consider recalibrating their transaction monitoring and risk
assessment of payment messages to identify any attempts to cover up sanctions evasion
efforts.

> Understanding sanctions evasion typologies can help organizations identify loopholes
against which they can test their transactions.

Vv

Organizations should test against known and potential sanctions evasion measures.

> Audit tests should be performed to assess of the soundness of a sanctions compliance
program.

 

53 US Department of Justice, “UniCredit Bank AG Agrees to Plead Guilty for Illegally Processing
Transactions in Violation of Iranian Sanctions,” April 15, 2019.

54 Reuters, “Italy’s UniCredit to pay $1.3 billion to settle US sanctions probe,” April 15, 2019.

55 Bloomberg, “UniCredit to Pay $1.3 Billion in Biggest Iran Sanctions Fine,” April 16, 2019.

CGSS Page 76
Version 1.531
Employee Training

An effective training program is an integral component ofa successful sanctions compliance
program. The training program should be provided to all appropriate employees and
personnel ona periodic basis (and ata minimum, annually) and generally should accomplish
the following:

e Provide job-specific knowledge based on need.
e Communicate the sanctions compliance responsibilities for each employee.

e Hold employees accountable for sanctions compliance training through assessments.

Most AML/CFT and sanctions compliance laws and regulations require financial institutions to
include training of appropriate and relevant employees as part of their formalized compliance
programs. In fact, training is one of the most important ways to stress the importance of
compliance efforts and to educate employees about what actions to take when they encounter
potential sanctions violations. Training also serves as an important control in the mitigation of
sanctions compliance risks to which the financial institution may be exposed.

COMPONENTS OF AN EFFECTIVE TRAINING PROGRAM

An effective training program should explain the relevant sanctions laws and regulatory
expectations and cover the institution’s policies and procedures used to mitigate sanctions
compliance risks. In this section, the term “training” will include both formal training courses
and ongoing communications—emails, newsletters, periodic team meetings, intranet sites,
and other means that facilitate the sharing of information—that serve to educate employees
and maintain their awareness of sanctions compliance requirements. Below is an outline of
who should receive sanctions compliance training, the topics that should form the basis of that
training, and how, when, and where that training should be delivered.

IDENTIFYING THE TARGET AUDIENCE

The first step in designing an effective training program is to identify the target audience. Most
areas of the financial institution should receive AML/CFT training, and additional personnel
need sanctions compliance training as well. In some countries, training programs must extend
beyond full-time and part-time employees to include contractors, consultants, interns,
apprentice placements, and/or secondees (colleagues from other offices, branches, or
subsidiaries). Each segment should be trained on sanctions compliance topics and other issues
that are relevant to their activities. The following list outlines groups of employees who may
be appropriate training targets, depending on the specific institution and scope of training:

e Customer-facing staff: As the financial institution’s first line of defense, customer-facing
staff members are the employees who need the deepest practical understanding of why

CGSS Page 77
Version 1.531
AML/CFT and sanctions compliance efforts are important and in what ways they need to
be vigilant against sanctions evasion. Although a general course will often be sufficient to
address the importance of sanctions compliance, additional training on specific unit
procedures related to the products and services carried out by the business line is often
needed. For example, credit and loan-operations staff members require training on how
sanctions evaders can misuse credit products, how the staff can recognize potential money
laundering, and what actions the staff should take when they suspect these activities.
Employees establishing loans and accounts for new customers need to know applicable
regulatory requirements and the institution’s policies and procedures for identification
and performing due diligence during the onboarding process.

e Operations personnel: Non-customer-facing personnel within an organization’s lines of
business are also included in the first line of defense and should be provided with
specialized training. For example, cash vault, wire transfer, trade finance, loan
underwriter, loan collections, and treasury management personnel are often in positions
to recognize illegal, fraudulent, and/or unusual account activity. Specialized training for
these individuals to recognize sanctions compliance red flags and to elevate unusual
activity to compliance personnel should be considered.

e Sanctions compliance staff: Under the direction ofa designated compliance officer, the
sanctions compliance staff members coordinate and monitor the organization’s day-to-day
compliance program in the second line of defense. Given this area’s responsibility for
managing the organization’s adherence to sanctions regulations, more advanced, ongoing
training to stay abreast of requirements and emerging trends is important. Often, this
additional training involves attending conferences and sanctions compliance
presentations that are more robust in nature.

e Independent testing staff: Independent testing personnel are the organization’s third line
of defense. Because this functional area independently assesses the adequacy of the
sanctions compliance program, these employees should receive periodic training
concerning regulatory requirements, changes in regulation, sanctions evasion methods,
sanctions enforcement, and their impact on the organization.

e Senior management and board of directors: The board and senior management do not
need the same degree of training as personnel in the first, second, or third lines of defense.
Specialized training for the organization’s leadership should address the importance of
sanctions compliance regulatory requirements, the penalties for noncompliance, the
potential for personal liability, and the organization’s unique risks. Without a general
understanding of this information, these leaders cannot adequately provide for
compliance oversight, approve relevant policies, or provide sufficient resources.

CGSS Page 78
Version 1.531
TRAINING TOPICS

Although the appropriate training topics will vary according to the institution and the specific
products and services it offers, several basic matters should be factored into sanctions

compliance training:

General background and history pertaining to sanctions, such as sanction types, evasion
tactics, and consequences of noncompliance

Legal framework of what sanctions laws apply to institutions and their employees

Penalties for sanctions noncompliance, including criminal and civil penalties, fines, jail
terms, and internal sanctions (e.g., disciplinary action up to and including termination of
employment)

Internal policies and procedures, including customer due diligence, enhanced due
diligence, ongoing due diligence, and any additional sanctions-relevant policy elements

Review of the internal sanctions risk assessments

Legal record-keeping requirements

Sanctions filtering and blocking requirements

Reporting requirements

How to react when faced with a suspicious customer or transaction

How to respond to customers who attempt to circumvent reporting requirements
Duties and accountability of employees

Nature of products and services offered, how they work, and their associated red flags

Maintaining confidentiality with sanctions compliance matters, especially if subsequent
AML investigations may arise

Sanctions trends and emerging issues related to criminal activity, terrorist financing, and
regulatory requirements

Real-life sanctions evasion schemes (preferably cases that have occurred at the institution
or at similar institutions), including how the pattern of activity was first detected, its
impact on the institution, and its ultimate resolution

The individuals who are responsible for designing the training program must identify which of
the above topics relate to the target audience. Trainers typically are a mixture of people within
the organization and external experts. The training is usually provided face-to-face for senior
members and executives, and either in person (in the form ofa workshop) or online for other
members of the organization.

CGSS Page 79
Version 1.531
TRAINING METHODS

The following are selected steps that trainers can take to develop an effective training
program:

e Identify the issues that need to be communicated and decide how best to disseminate the
message. A memo or email may accomplish what is needed without formal, in-person
training. Sometimes, e-learning can efficiently do the job, whereas in other cases, in-
person training is the most appropriate option.

e Identify the audience by functional area as well as by level of employee/management. New
hires should also receive training that is different from that provided to veteran
employees.

e Determine the specific issues to be addressed, such as issues uncovered by audits or
regulatory exams, or changes to systems, products, or regulations.

e Determine who can best develop and present the training program.

e When decentralized training is planned (e.g., across large branch networks), determine if
Train the Trainer sessions (sessions that teach potential instructors) are necessary.

e Create a course abstract or curriculum that addresses course goals, objectives, and desired
outcomes. Identify who the audience should be and how the material will be presented.

e Establish a training calendar that identifies the topics and frequency of each course
session.

e Consider whether handouts would be helpful to reinforce the message of the training and
serve as a reference tool after training has concluded.

e Consider tests as a means to evaluate how well the training was understood, and
implement a mandatory passing score. Retain scores for future reference.

e Consider using case studies in the training to illustrate points and emphasize the practical
application of the course content.

e Include time for discussion.

e Consider the audience’s attention span, and plan to teach small, easy-to-digest, easy-to-
categorize issues.

e Track attendance. Ask attendees to sign in for each session, and issue reminders if make-
up sessions are needed. Unexcused absences may warrant disciplinary action and notation
in employee personnel files.

CGSS Page 80
Version 1.531
TRAINING TIMING AND LOCATIONS

An institution’s training should be ongoing and on a regular schedule. Existing employees
should at least attend an annual training session, and new employees should receive
appropriate training with respect to their job function and within a reasonable period after
joining or transferring to a new job.

Situations may arise that demand an immediate session. For example, an emergency training
session may be necessary after an examination or audit that uncovers sanctions compliance
deficiencies. A news story that names the institution or a recent regulatory action, suchas a
consent order, could also prompt immediate additional training. Changes in software, systems,
policies, procedures, and regulations are additional triggers for training sessions.

Some institutions have training centers that allow trainees to escape the distractions of daily
work activity and focus on learning new information. Some types of training, such as the
evaluation ofa sanctions evasion case example, are more effective when conducted in small
groups. Role-playing exercises, which may be used to complement a prepared lecture or panel
discussion, are also more effective in small groups. These training sessions can be held
anywhere. Large groups can be trained using computer-based training courses, which can be
designed to automatically record attendance and test attendees (with a required minimum
score to demonstrate understanding of the material).

CASE EXAMPLE: STANDARD CHARTERED BANK, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

Federal and state authorities in the United States and United Kingdom levied a $1.1 billion
penalty against Standard Chartered Bank (StanChart), one of London’s largest banks, for
engaging in thousands of illicit transactions worth hundreds of millions of dollars involving
blacklisted countries such as Iran, Sudan, and Syria. This was a rare global settlement for
financial crime compliance failures.

The US Department of Justice (DOJ), the US treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC),
the New York State Department of Financial Services (NYDFS), the United Kingdom’s (UK)
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), and other federal investigative and regulatory agencies
issued the penalty against StanChart for years of violating US sanctions policies and essentially
breaching a prior deferred prosecution agreement.

The department’s investigation further uncovered that the bank’s compliance infrastructure in
the UAE region “was woefully inadequate.... Compliance staff was poorly trained and
unconcerned with US sanctions regulations.” Additionally, OFAC found “SCB’s compliance

CGSS Page 81
Version 1.531
program ... suffered from multiple systemic deficiencies, including failure to respond to
warning signs in a timely and inefficient manner.”5¢

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Organizations should strengthen policies and procedures to dismantle systemic
deficiencies in their sanctions compliance program.

> Organizations should ensure that training is provided to all staff so that they understand
the dynamics of sanctions and recognize sanctions evasion tactics.

> Senior management must stay aware of risk exposure, as it can severely impact the
business. Whenever possible, senior management should engage in tailored face-to-face
sanctions training.

 

56 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for April 9, 2019.

CGSS Page 82
Version 1.531
Sanctions Evasion
Techniques

Evasion Methods: Common Techniques

 

Sanctions evasion is the deliberate act of avoiding or circumventing sanctions to engage in
prohibited activity without being caught. For financial institutions, this includes attempting to
remove or conceal the involvement of sanctioned places, entities, or individuals ina
transaction or series of transactions with which it is involved. When sanctions evasion is
successful, a business that would have been flagged, required a license, restricted, or
prohibited is otherwise allowed to proceed unhindered.

Who is behind sanctions evasion? Direct participants to a transaction can arrange evasion.
These sanctions evaders often know about due diligence, filters, and name screening. They
understand the regulatory requirements and spend time and resources learning how to break
the rules without detection. Financial institutions, manufacturing, packaging, and shipping
companies can be complicit and sometimes help make these arrangements.

Customer Relationships

The customer relationship should be the primary defense against sanctions evasion. A
customer relationship encompasses any and all contact with a prospective customer. This
contact includes the dialogue that takes place during onboarding and conversations that occur
as a customer uses an organization’s products and services. People in the management,
marketing, operations, and compliance departments may take part in this communication.

It is important to fully understand the nature of a customer, the businesses the customer is
engaged in, the structure of the company and the individuals behind it, and where and with
whom it does business. With this knowledge, an institution is better armed to detect any
activity that does not have a valid business purpose and does not make sense for the customer.

For example, a commodity wholesaler is a customer at a bank. This wholesaler receives
financing from the bank for sending shiploads of grain to ports in Southeast Asia. The
wholesaler, without notice, begins shipping its product to Dandong, China, near North Korea.
The wholesaler also has delayed providing the underlying trade documentation for the

CGSS Page 83
Version 1.531
shipments. This change in customer behavior should be a red flag to cause the bank to further
clarify the customer relationship. It would also require the bank to investigate further as to the
ultimate destination of the goods. This same requirement, understanding where the goods will
end up, would also apply to the wholesaler if it does not already know.

Counterparty Relationships

Given the complexity of a transaction, it is vital for an organization to know not only their
customers, but also the customers’ counterparties, as well as the parties who own or control
them, in order to understand who may be behind sanctions evasion. A counterparty is simply
the other side ofa transaction—the seller where the customer is the buyer, or vice versa. An
institution establishes counterparty relationships with other third-party participants ina
transaction for an established customer. Another way to establish a counterparty relationship
is to provide a service to an individual or entity that has not established a full customer
relationship. Such a relationship usually exists only for the life of the transaction itself, as
there are no agreements or contracts between an institution and this entity or individual.
However, an organization still has the responsibility to screen its counterparties to prevent
sanctions violations and identify any potential red flags.

Two Types of Evasion

Evasion can happen in two ways. External evasion happens when the customer or its third-
party violates sanctions. Internal evasion happens when an organization’s own staff members
commit a violation, such as stripping. What is internal evasion for one firm (e.g., a firm’s
employees removing sanctioned information from a payment message) may be external for
another firm (e.g., the firm receiving the stripped payment messages). When a staff member
either intentionally fails to apply or overrides internal controls, it is an example of internal
evasion. Another example is when a staff member uses client accounts to conceal the origin of
funds.

To evade sanctions, parties and counterparties use techniques that can be creative. One of
these techniques is stripping. Depending on the circumstances, it can be blatant or subtle.

Stripping

Stripping is the intentional removal or modification of information froma record, either by a
customer or by an organization’s staff, to avoid detection against a sanctions list. The most
common methods involve intentionally omitting or removing key information froma
transaction, such as the sender’s name or the business name. Stripping may happen with or
without the knowledge of other participants in the transaction.

CGSS Page 84
Version 1.531
Financial institutions send payment messages, for example, through SWIFT messages. (These
are the systems that banks and other financial institutions use to transfer money between
institutions. SWIFT stands for Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunications.) Financial institutions later inthe payment chain will use programs to
search for clues that the message involves a sanctions nexus. They will look for specific
keywords, among other items, and when information such as these keywords is stripped from
messages, the financial institutions handling the payment messages downstream have little
information to review and on which to base a decision.

An organization’s own staff members can take part in this type of stripping.

BANKS FINED FOR STRIPPING

Here are two examples of banks that received fines for stripping.

CASE EXAMPLE: BNP PARIBAS, 2015

CASE SUMMARY

In 2014, BNP Paribas received a record fine of $9 billion from the US treasury department’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) for essentially providing dollar-clearing services to
individuals and entities associated with Sudan, Iran, and Cuba in violation of US sanctions.
(Dollar clearing means converting clients’ payments from a foreign currency into US dollars.)

Some of its staff had stripped references to the sanctioned countries from SWIFT messages. As
a result, the payments circumvented the screening controls and were processed on behalf of
Sudanese, Iranian, and Cuban sanctions targets.

BNP Paribas (BNPP) pleaded guilty to criminal conspiracy. US prosecutors said the bank had
engaged ina “long-term, multi-jurisdictional conspiracy” that involved the most senior levels
at the company. BNPP repeatedly stripped out references to sanctioned entities in wire
transfer messages to US clearing banks, replacing those references with its own name or with
a code word.

Staff within the bank were well aware of the relevant sanctions and restrictions. They created
a process and issued instructions to circumvent the rules by removing any information that
would trip sanctions filters or reveal the involvement of the sanctioned person, entity, or
jurisdiction. Internal messages declared the purpose of this process was “to guarantee the
confidentiality of the messages and to avoid their disclosure to any potential regulatory
authorities.” Multiple examples in excerpts from internal documents revealed during the
prosecution indicate conscious commission of the sanctions violations within BNPP. The
priority was financial gain for the bank, and the sanctions were seen as an obstacle to be
worked around rather than complied with.

According to the NYDFS (New York Department of Financial Services), BNPP told its bank
operations staff, “Do not stipulate in any case the name of Iranian entities on messages

CGSS Page 85
Version 1.531
transmitted to American banks or to foreign banks installed in the USA.” BNPP issued policy
directives to ensure that the SWIFT MT202 message named only the “receiving institution
(and not the [ultimate] Iranian beneficiary institution),” NYDFS stated.

Similar to the way they handled transactions related to Iran, BNPP Paris told its Cuban clients
not to mention Cuba or any Cuban sanctioned parties in wire messages that the bank’s New
York branch processed. In early 2006, a senior lawyer at the BNPP Paris head office expressed
his doubts about the business: “We cannot rule out that we would have to explain to OFAC that
this is part of a long-standing facility with Cuban entities. Could that trigger a retroactive
investigation ofall prior payments...?” The NYDFS order notes that senior BNPP employees
authorized continuation of the business because of the long relationships with the customers
and to avoid the cost of conversion into euro-denominated loans. At the end of 2009, an
internal memo described one Cuban party as a “strategic customer with whom we intend to
arrange new financing secured by offshore flows.”

Compliance staff at BNPP’s Geneva branch met with senior executives from local and Paris
offices in September 2005 to express concerns about transactions involving Sudan. Georges
Chodron de Courcel, then BNPP Group chief operating officer, attended, but he dismissed staff
members’ concerns and asked that no meeting minutes be kept. The bank’s senior compliance
staff then elected to continue the business on the grounds that “the relationship with this body
of counterparties is a historical one and the commercial stakes are significant.”

In 2004, BNPP entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with New York
regulators to correct deficiencies in the monitoring of its correspondent banking relationships
with overseas clients and their USD transactions. That same year, BNPP executives from Paris
and Geneva met to discuss the impact of US embargoes. They developed a solution to protect
the New York branch by insulating it from the sanctioned activity and using other unaffiliated
US banks.

A local compliance officer warned BNPP Geneva executives that structuring a workaround
might be seen as a “serious breach” and a “grave violation.” Nonetheless, BNPP implemented
the workaround. It continued through March 2008, when the bank was signed off as having
met the terms of the 2004 MOU. According to the NYDFS, “the bank was fully aware that the
2004 MOU’s termination was based on falsified facts.” The NYDFS contended that BNPP’s
group head of compliance and internal control coordinator was aware of the bank’s continued
activities with sanctioned entities but kept silent.

Other evidence indicated that compliance staff at a senior level were well aware that stripping
was widespread. For example, the Dutch bank ABN AMRO reached a settlement with US
authorities for similar US sanctions breaches in 2005. After that settlement, the BNPP head of

CGSS Page 86
Version 1.531
ethics and compliance for North America commented in an internal message, “the dirty little
secret isn’t so secret anymore, oui?”57, 58 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64

This is a clear case of prioritizing commercial gain over regulatory compliance. It again
illustrates the lack of respect within the organization for the laws and regulations that govern
the business.

The following is a list of root causes of the noncompliance:
e BNPP lacked a compliance culture.

e Abusiness prioritized commercial gain over regulatory compliance. It saw no need to
comply with relevant sanctions.

e Internal cries of alarm were met with indifference and were not escalated to regulators.

e There was less than full due diligence from the recipients of the payments, given the
missing information. Either the parties receiving the funds were complicit in the
deception, or they should have noted the missing or incomplete information.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Management prioritized commercial gain over regulatory compliance. However, the size of
the regulatory fine surely outweighed any profits from this aspect of their business.

> Internal sanctions controls must be detailed and meticulous to ensure that altered or
missing information is flagged and captured before processing.

> Sanctions programs should be tested regularly to ensure that they are current,
comprehensive, and effective. These tests should include common evasion methods.

 

57 Ben Protess and Jessica Silver-Greenberg, “BNP Paribas Admits Guilt and Agrees to Pay $8.9 Billion
Fine to U.S.,” New York Times, June 30, 2014.

58 “France: BNP pays fine for violating U.S. sanctions,” Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting
Project, July 2, 2014.

59 Jonathan Masters, “What are economic sanctions?” Council on Foreign Relations, August 7, 2017.

60 Kamal Ahmed, “BNP Paribas to pay $9 billion to settle sanctions violations,” BBC News, July 1, 2014.

61 Martin Arnold and Kara Scannell, “BNP fine sparks calls for cultural change,” July 1, 2014.

62 Martin Russell, “EU sanctions: A key foreign and security policy instrument,” European Parliamentary
Research Service, May 2018.

63 Michael Stothard and Martin Arnold, “Biggest threat to BNP Paribas could be to its reputation,” June
30, 2014.

64 Patricia Hurtado, “BNP Paribas pleads guilty in U.S. to violating sanctions,” Bloomberg, July 9, 2014.

CGSS Page 87
Version 1.531
CREDIT AGRICOLE FINED IN 2015

In 2015, Crédit Agricole agreed to a combined settlement of more than $780 million for
stripping information from more than 4,000 USD SWIFT payment messages.

At the time of the settlement, NYDFS also ordered the termination ofa specific bank employee
who had drafted internal communication instructing the concealment of information relating
to Iranian payments.

As a result of the stripping, payments were processed in violation of Sudanese, Cuban,
Myanmarese, and Iranian sanctions restrictions. Operations staff and managers helped
remove references to sanctioned individuals or entities from payments going to or through US
banks. These personnel were aware of US sanctions and of the requirement to block or reject
these transactions, but they developed special payment practices to circumvent the sanctions.

WHAT IS EXTERNAL STRIPPING?

Stripping can happen externally in some situations, but when there are stripping violations at
a financial institution, these are rarely entirely external. There must be an inside person to
commit the crime. The two examples above—BNP Paribas and Crédit Agricole—are both cases
of internal stripping.

External stripping happens when a party outside the organization removes information from
incoming payment messages. This removal is a deliberate attempt to hide the identity of the
sender, recipient, or jurisdiction from where a payment originated.

WHAT IS A U-TURN PAYMENT?

A U-turn is a transaction performed by a bank in one country for the benefit of a bank in
another country. A bank or other institution from country “A” sends a transaction through a
bank in country “B” using an offshore bank. In the financial world, U-turn payments are most
commonly known in relation to US sanctions— particularly to those imposed on Iran.

Before 2008, OFAC allowed a limited exemption under a general license from restrictions that
prevented US banks from processing transactions involving Iran or the Iranian government.
US dollar transactions were permitted ifa US bank was not directly processing a payment for
an Iranian entity. To do this, both the sender and beneficiary banks would use intermediary
banks. This meant that any money that passed through the US clearing system exclusively
came from (or was sent to) the intermediary banks, not from the entities directly.

Stripping is associated with U-turn payments. Prior to 2008, some financial institutions
stripped out offending terms to prevent the transactions being conducted under the limited
exemption from being blocked and held up for various review processes. They were later
investigated and scrutinized by regulators for this practice.

CGSS Page 88
Version 1.531
In 2008, OFAC revoked the U-turn exemption related to Iran. However, a number of financial
institutions continued to process U-turn payments, in violation of a number of sanctions.
These financial institutions would remove or not include offending terms that would cause a
payment to be blocked and reviewed. The most common way that this happens is when an
intermediary bank strips information from a payment message before sending it along the
transaction chain.

Figure 5: How Iran Receives Dollars for Oil
Oil exports

Petrol

ind

©OO®

Gat
Cit

 

=
ill

Non-US bank

b

@oo® UU

Non-US bank

=)

 

US bank

Wire payments have data about Iran illegally removed

WHICH SANCTIONS ARE MOST OFTEN ASSOCIATED WITH U-TURN
PAYMENTS?

By using a U-turn payment, it is possible for sanctions evaders to defy the following:
e Targeted sanctions against specific countries

e Inclusion of various entities on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list in an effort to
prevent terrorism

e Individuals named as SDNs
How? The evader simply removes the relevant information from the payment message or
wire.

There have been examples of U-turn payments related to both Iran and Cuba. However, many
countries and territories throughout the world have antiterrorism regulations similar to those
of the United States. These countries maintain lists very similar to the OFAC SDN list, and the

CGSS Page 89
Version 1.531
intended results of those restrictions and punishments are similar. For example, the
Commerce and Economic Development Bureau in Hong Kong has enacted laws to give effect to
UN sanctions. Hong Kong has established a sanctions regime and has lists related to UN travel
bans, individuals and entities subject to financial sanctions, and specific goods subject to
sanctions on North Korea.

In any jurisdiction where the government has prohibited its citizens and businesses operating
within its borders from engaging in economic activity with specific countries, governments,
businesses, or individuals, there is an incentive to omit identifying information that could
prevent a payment or transaction. For this reason, it is essential to look out for U-turn
payments, stripping, and similar violations.

WHAT IS THE MOTIVATION BEHIND STRIPPING?

There can be many motivations for altering or omitting (stripping) the names of sanctioned
entities and individuals from payments and transactions. For example, a business may enter
into a contract with an entity that the business owners or managers are fully aware is subject
to sanctions. In this case, the owners or managers may deliberately omit information froma
payment or other communication to avoid alerting others who are processing or who are
otherwise involved in the transaction.

Depending on the complexity of the transaction, it may be possible for a single bad actor to
hide the link to sanctioned individuals or entities. However, there is often collusion between
two or more parties—the importer and an employee at his or her bank, for example. Bank
employees in jurisdictions outside the one that has issued the sanctions may act with a sense
of patriotism if they or their government disagree with the sanctions. In such cases, managers
may all but officially authorize the effort to evade the sanctions.

Other cases are not based on patriotism, solidarity, or political beliefs. In these cases, a person
or entity may offer a bribe to persuade the bank employee to alter or omit the relevant
information. In some cases, the bribe and the bank employee’s personal beliefs may both play
arole.

In early 2019, Standard Chartered Bank agreed to extend its deferred prosecution agreement
with US authorities for two more years, in part because of the behavior of two employees at
the bank’s Dubai branch. Both employees actively assisted formerly blocked customers to
reopen accounts and process payments as front companies. A front company to an Iranian
money-exchange business gifted one of the employees a large sum of money to buy a car.
Emails from the employee’s bank email account to the customer mention this gift, which
passed through the customer’s account to the employee’s account with Standard Chartered
Bank without detection. That employee went on to actively circumvent bank policy and
sanctions to help the customer.

Both employees advised customers how to avoid detection and how to open accounts without
tripping the bank’s mechanism for identifying previously blocked entities. In some instances,
they advised customers to close their accounts before the bank made a formal report.

CGSS Page 90
Version 1.531
There can also be institutional incentives to alter payments or transactions. For example, a
branch or representative office may be required to enforce sanctions based on where it is
primarily incorporated (as is the case with all US-based banks and businesses). Or that branch
or representative office may have voluntarily chosen to abide by various sanctions programs
because of a presence in those markets and as part of a comprehensive risk management and
compliance program. Such offices can be at a competitive disadvantage if competitor banks or
businesses are not required to comply with sanctions. In this scenario, managers or employees
may not appreciate the risk and potential consequences of sanctions evasion.

CHANGING RISKS OF INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STRIPPING

Past enforcement against those who took part in stripping has resulted in financial institutions
making compliance program changes that are designed to combat internal stripping. As a
result, since 2012, fewer sanctions violation cases involving internal stripping have been
reported. Still, while the likelihood of future internal stripping has considerably diminished,
external stripping by outside financial institutions still remains a risk.

CASE EXAMPLE: COMMERZBANK, 2015

CASE SUMMARY

In March 2015, Commerzbank agreed to a combined fine of $1.45 billion and a deferred
prosecution agreement with the US Department of Justice and the New York Department of
Financial Services (NYDFS). Commerzbank also reached settlement agreements with OFAC
and the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System for violations of the International
Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), and New York state
law. By entering into these agreements, Commerzbank admitted and accepted responsibility
for criminal conduct in violation of IEEPA. Commerzbank’s New York office admitted criminal
conduct in violation of the BSA and agreed to take remedial steps with its compliance program
to implement rigorous internal controls and to ensure future compliance.

The deferred prosecution agreements concerned the “willful” movement of $263 million
through the US financial system between 2002 and 2008 for sanctioned individuals and
entities in Iran and Sudan. Commerzbank used schemes designed to disguise the nature of the
payments and the individuals connected to them from US regulators. The bank did this by
omitting information from cover messages, removing information from payment messages
processed through its own New York office and other US-based financial institutions, and via
other purpose-built means.

Commerzbank’s Frankfurt office established a specific department to amend any payments
involving Iran by removing identification that would flag US sanctions filters. A custom
solution for an Iranian customer involved issuance of Commerzbank checks that showed a
London address and an account number but no other identifying information. These checks
allowed the customer to pay US payees.

CGSS Page 91
Version 1.531
Compliance staff and senior managers raised concerns about this activity, but the omissions
and amendments continued. As a result, the organization began working against itself. The
US-based offices tried to spot and block these transactions, but offices outside of the United

States actively worked to avoid detection. In spite of people within Commerzbank raising flags
and noting concerns, nobody raised the suspicious activity to authorities as they should have.
This failure resulted in more activity—namely, a multimillion-dollar securities fraud scheme—
processing through the bank without detection or intervention.®>. 6. 67

The root causes of the noncompliance included:
e Inadequate policies to ensure proper reporting of suspicious activity
e Inconsistent policies and lack of transparency within the organization across jurisdictions

e Failure of the organization to conduct due diligence on its own foreign offices, their clients,
and their practices

e Lack of a proper “compliance culture,” which resulted in concerns raised by compliance
staff being ignored

e Inadequate controls to ensure consistent transaction handling and processing

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Institutions routinely invest money and time in their compliance programs. However, if
management fails to act on the resulting information, then these investments have no
added value.

> The US Bank Secrecy Act officer’s effectiveness was negated because managers ignored
notifications of the volume and seriousness of the internal alert and downplayed flagged
transactions. There must be a consistent tone from senior management down through all
areas of the bank that reinforces the importance of compliance controls and procedures.

> Even within larger institutions that have comprehensive compliance programs and well-
developed processes and procedures, it is possible for a small number of individuals to
evade those processes intentionally.

> Policies and controls must be applied consistently against both internal and external
parties and entities.

 

65 “Commerzbank AG admits to sanctions and bank secrecy violations, agrees to forfeit $563 million and
pay $79 million fine,” US Department of Justice, March 12, 2015.

66 “Commerzbank Deferred Prosecution Agreement,” US District Court for the District of Columbia,
March 11, 2015.

67 Matt Anderson, “NYDS announces Commerzbank to pay $1.45 billion, terminate employees, install
independent monitor for banking law violations,” New York State Department of Financial Services,
March 12, 2015.

CGSS Page 92
Version 1.531
> Allstaff with compliance responsibilities must clearly understand their responsibilities
under internal policies and the laws in their jurisdiction.

> Internal policies should not conflict with jurisdictional laws. Had the employees in this
case acted on the suspicious information, in compliance with US law, and completed the
required suspicious activity reports, the violations would not have been as egregious and
the fines would likely have been much lower.

WIRE-STRIPPING

Sanctions evaders may deliberately strip details from a wire payment, allowing that payment
to go undetected. International wire transfers use the Real Time Gross Settlement Systems
(RTGS) within a given jurisdiction and correspondent bank accounts when wires travel
between countries. When a payment travels through multiple parties before reaching the
intended final destination, there are multiple opportunities for information to be abbreviated,
omitted, or altered. For this reason, most jurisdictions have enacted laws that require
payments to contain certain “basic” information, including the sender and recipient’s name
and address. When a wire originates from a sanctioned entity or location, and the intent is to
deliver it within the United States or European Union, where restrictions would ordinarily flag
the payment and block it, sanctions evaders have an incentive to remove the information that
would trip the system.

Let’s imagine a scenario in which a company in a sanctioned country has an office in Hong
Kong through which the country orders raw materials and components. The Hong Kong office
shares the sanctioned name, but it operates in an unsanctioned location. It maintains a
banking relationship with a large regional bank that has correspondent relationships in
Europe and the United States. To buy materials from these two markets, the Hong Kong office
arranges with its bank to abbreviate their name or to remove it from the outgoing payment
wires. If the bank agrees, no intermediate institutions or systems will flag the involvement ofa
sanctioned party.

Now let’s reverse the situation. A US-based or EU-based business has connections to a
sanctioned entity and wants to move funds to that individual or business from the United
States. If the bank were to provide full information, including the name of the sanctioned
entity or individual, the outgoing payment would be flagged. The parties could avoid this
flagging, and thereby evade sanctions, in one of two ways. (1) They could provide false
information to the US-based or EU-based bank to initiate the payment, and an intermediary
institution that was aware of the actual routing could assist in the transaction. Or (2) a bank
employee could be complicit and disguise the beneficiary information until the funds leave the
jurisdiction.

Stripping a wire of sanctions-related information cannot effectively be done by a single
individual. It requires the collusion of multiple individuals or entities to effectively remove or
disguise the information.

CGSS Page 93
Version 1.531
Separating Messages

THREE TYPES OF SWIFT MESSAGES

A number of payment systems are available in international banking and finance. This section
will focus on SWIFT messages. SWIFT is the infrastructure supporting both global
correspondent banking and domestic payment systems. The network includes approximately
8,000 financial institutions in more than 200 countries and territories, and it helps promote
efficiency in the global payment system. Three types of SWIFT messages for general
processing of transactions will be detailed: MT103, MT202, and MT202COV.

Banks and other financial institutions use an MT103 payment message when a single payment
is being made between two banks. That message gives instructions to the receiver of the
transferred funds. The MT202 and MT202COV messages are the bank-to-bank instructions
that tell the intermediary bank to cover the payment of the beneficiary’s bank by crediting the
account and debiting the sending bank’s account. Financial institutions use these messages to
make customer credit transfers and interbank transfers.

Financial institutions usually send the MT103 and MT202COV messages together so that all
parties have full transparency for the transaction. The original MT103 goes to the beneficiary
bank, but copies of the message can go to any intermediary banks needed to process the
transaction. The messages provide complete information about the remitter and the
beneficiary to all banks involved.

HOW A SWIFT MESSAGE GETS SEPARATED

Separating messages means sending two different types of messages for the same payment,
but with incomplete or different information. This type of sanctions evasion happens when
more than two banks are involved in the process.

To decrease processing time, it is common for an originating bank to use the cover method,
whereby the originating bank sends the MT103 directly to the beneficiary bank while sending
the MT202COV indirectly to the involved correspondent banks. Prior to the creation of the
cover method (MT202COV), this situation would leave the intermediary bank with only a
partial view of the overall transaction as it would still receive a MT202 payment, but it did not
have the required information contained in an underlying MT103 as does the MT202COV. This
left the intermediary bank unable to identify the ultimate originators and beneficiaries
because the transfer appeared as a bank-to-bank payment. The problem was the format of the
SWIFT message and the amount of information

it was possible to include on it. The intermediary bank wouldn’t know the identity of the
ultimate beneficiary because this information was not on the historical format of the MT202
message. The intermediary was thus unable to filter for or scan the sender or ultimate
beneficiary’s information. This situation changed when SWIFT introduced the MT202COV in
2009. With the MT202COV, the payment message contains a sequence B field. Sequence B

CGSS Page 94
Version 1.531
information must be identical to the same fields of 50a and 59b of the underlying MT103. This
is to allow for the identification and screening of the underlying parties.

The SWIFT User Handbook (2009) requires the use of MT202COV when a payment is sent to
an intermediary bank involving an underlying customer credit transfer, and both the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision and the Wolfsberg Group have advised banks to follow this
process. However, if the sending bank is motivated to conceal the ultimate beneficiary of the
funds, it could avoid sending full information to all banks involved in the transaction. Instead,
the sending bank could send an MT103 message to the beneficiary’s bank to credit the
customer’s account, which would be the ultimate destination of the funds. The sending bank
would perhaps include a reference to the cover payment, such as “cover to follow” or
something similar. Then the sending bank would send an MT202 message (designed for
interbank settlement messages only) to the intermediary

bank, with instructions to credit the beneficiary’s bank. This message would have no
information concerning the ultimate beneficiary or sender and no sequence B.

The MT202, as opposed to the MT202COV, does not have fields to include the originator and
beneficiary information (sequence B). Therefore, the intermediary bank is blind to the details
behind the transaction and could unknowingly process payments involving sanctioned entities
or individuals. The banks involved in sending the SWIFT messages and transferring the money
(and those banks’ employees) are the only parties that have the power to alter the information
in this flow. However, as explained earlier, there can be many motivations for bank employees
to consciously omit important information.

Auditors, investigators, and authorities face several challenges when investigating this type of
sanctions evasion, as message records can be stored in different formats and at different
locations. Reconstructing a payment flow can take significant effort given the volume of SWIFT
messages. In 2017, the network carried more than 27 million messages per day across 200
countries. With the introduction of the MT202COV message, there is a lower probability ofthe
intermediary bank not having full information on the payment. However, if the originating
bank’s intent is to evade sanctions, it could alter the information on the MT202COV to hide the
sanctioned entity’s or individual’s name. The originating bank could also send an MT202 and
mislead the intermediary bank that the transfer is a traditional interbank credit and does not
involve another sender or beneficiary.

The SWIFT network places the responsibility on the originating bank to select the correct
message type and complete it with factual and accurate information. Therefore, ifthe
originating bank or its employees intend to evade sanctions, it remains possible to do so. For
example, in April 2019, the US Department of Justice and the United Kingdom’s Financial
Conduct Authority fined Standard Chartered Bank $1.1 billion. The fine was for violating
sanctions related to Iran and processing payments in US dollars for entities tied to that
country. Standard Chartered Bank routed payments from its Dubai office through New York.
According to the bank, the violations happened because two junior employees were aware of
both the sanctions and the Iranian connections for the customers involved in the transactions.
These two employees conspired with the customers to violate the laws and bank policies. In
spite ofa structure designed to provide full transparency and a financial institution’s best

CGSS Page 95
Version 1.531
efforts in terms of training and policies, it remains possible to evade sanctions by using this
method.

SWIFT MESSAGES FOR INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS

Let’s look at a scenario for international cross border payments. The originator and
beneficiary are individuals in different parts of the world—Frankfurt and Hong Kong. They
engage in financial transactions with each other through the international banking system.

Figure 6: SWIFT Messaging Mechanics 1

Originator (Frankfurt) Beneficiary (Hong Kong)

ic SWIFT messaging mechanics Vegi

Payment order

Credit
MT103 Payment Order

>
>

MT202Cc0V MT202COV

MT910 Credit Advice

EP
Bp

Banks A and B are, respectively, the originator’s and beneficiary’s banks in their home
countries. Banks C and D have correspondent relationships with Banks A and B respectively.

CGSS Page 96
Version 1.531
Figure 7: Swift Messaging Mechanics 2

Originator (Frankfurt) Beneficiary (Hong Keng)

ICS SWIFT messaging mechanics Vegi

Payment order
Credit

MT103 Payment Order

>
>

MT202C0V MT202COV

0) MT910 Credit Advice
=
SS

The originator goes to Bank A and arranges for a payment to be made to the beneficiary’s
account in Bank B. Bank A sends an MT103 payment message to Bank B. If Bank A has an
account with Bank B in the currency of the transaction, then no other SWIFT message is
necessary.

eB

But what if the transaction needs to be in Hong Kong dollars and Bank A doesn’t hold an
account in this currency with Bank B? In that case, Bank A has two options. It may first use a
method called the MT103 serial payment. Using this method, Bank A sends the MT103
message to Bank C, which will then send the MT103 message to Bank D, which will then send
the MT103 message to Bank B. The MT103 serial payment can be time consuming as each
involved bank must review and process the payment.

Alternatively, it can use the cover method. Bank A will send an MT103 message to Bank B. At
the same time, it will send an MT202COV message to its correspondent (the first
intermediary), which is Bank C. The MT202COV message must contain the originator and
beneficiary information to be used for sanctions screening. If Bank C was also the
correspondent bank for Bank B, it could then settle the payment immediately upon receiving
the MT202COV. Such is not the case in the below example. Because Bank C does not havea
correspondent relationship with Bank B, it then sends another MT202COV to another
correspondent (the second intermediary), in this case Bank D, which does have a
correspondent relationship with Bank B. Upon receiving the MT202COV message, Bank D
would send an MT910 Credit Advice to Bank B in order to complete the transaction. However,
if

Bank C did not have a relationship with Bank D, it may have to find another intermediary that
did have a relationship with Bank D, thus creating another intermediary.

CGSS Page 97
Version 1.531
Figure 8: SWIFT Messaging Mechanics 3

Originator (Frankfurt) Beneficiary (Hong Kong)

IS) SWIFT messaging mechanics Veg

Payment order
Credit

MT103 Payment Order

[=>

MT202C0V MT202COV

MT910 Credit Advice

>
=>

Because the MT202 message does not have the fields for the originator and the beneficiary
information, it was replaced, in November 2009, by the MT202COV message, which does
include the originator and the beneficiary information in order to support sanctions screening.

Since November 2009, the MT202 message should only be used for payments between banks
where the originator and the beneficiary information is not required because customers are
not involved in the transaction.

In 2015, US regulators fined Deutsche Bank for evading sanctions restrictions. One way the
organization did this was to use MT103 and MT202 messages. This ensured that Deutsche
Bank’s New York entity, and other US clearing banks, did not receive the originator and the
beneficiary information about the underlying sanctioned parties involved in the transactions.

Payments and Transactions

What other tactics do people use to try to trick an automated screening tool or otherwise
avoid detection during sanctions payment screening?

e They may rearrange the data if they know ofa field that isn’t routinely screened.

e They may replace information with false data. For example, they may use a bank identifier
code assigned to a bank in a neutral country. Or they may use unusual combinations of
characters, such as “%&%$%.” Similar to the way email spammers might use special
characters that may look like letters but not be recognized as letters by automatic filters,

CGSS Page 98
Version 1.531
they seek to avoid detection by altering a name or providing nonsensical input in
“mandatory fill” fields while avoiding detection as a sanctioned destination or entity.

e They may use red-flag phrases such as “No name,” or “On behalf of...”

e They may alter or abbreviate the sender or beneficiary’s name, change the spelling to how
it sounds, add spaces within the name, or omit a middle name.

e They may manually alter a message before sending it to the next financial institution.

It is important to review the entire contents of a message when there is a hit or an alert.
Organizations must check the way their screening systems review a payment message. Are all
fields scanned? Can the filters be set to detect inconsistencies, such as routing numbers or
bank identification codes that don’t match the names within the message? Can the filters be
set to create an alert when a field contains combinations of numbers and characters when it
should contain text? Individuals use messages in many ways to try to evade detection, and it is
important to make sure that any automated methods used are calibrated effectively and that
the review and adjudication of alerts is thorough.

USING NESTED ACCOUNTS

Correspondent bank accounts are necessary for the global financial system to function
smoothly. Regulators understand and accept this, provided there is transparency and all
parties engaged in day-to-day payment traffic understand whom they are facing in these
transactions. Nested accounts

happen when a foreign financial institution accesses the US financial system through an
account it holds with another foreign financial institution—without the parties within the US
financial system understanding that they are facing a customer’s customer.

For example, let’s say Bank A in China has an account with Bank B in Italy. Bank A, which is on
a government sanctions list, initiates a payment on behalf of its customer (also in China)
through Bank B to make a payment in US dollars to a US manufacturer. The US bank receiving
the payment for their customer may only see the name of Bank B and the original sender, with
no evidence of Bank A’s involvement.

Another example would be a bank in a sanctioned location, such as Iran. This bank would be in
receipt of dollar payments from activity elsewhere in the world and unable to clear those
payments. The Iranian bank would use a correspondent account at a bank in an unsanctioned
location to send the dollars to the United States for clearing and would arrange for their name
to be removed from the payment communication. This scheme requires the willing or ignorant
cooperation of the second foreign financial institution to ensure that the information
pertaining to the sanctioned entity or location is not included in any payment communication
to the US bank.

CGSS Page 99
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE: BNP PARIBAS AND SUDANESE CUSTOMERS, 2015

CASE SUMMARY

This study guide has already addressed the large fine BNP Paribas (BNPP) incurred for
violating sanctions restrictions and providing US-dollar clearing services for sanctioned
countries. It will now take a closer look at the activity within that event that related
specifically to Sudan.

BNPP processed approximately $6.4 billion through the US financial system for Sudanese
sanctioned entities from July 2006 until June 2007. This included approximately $4 billion on
behalf of a financial institution owned by the government of Sudan. Internal emails showed
BNPP employees raising concerns about these activities, citing the role of the Sudanese
government in supporting terrorism and committing human rights abuses. In March 2007, one
senior compliance officer at BNPP wrote to other high-level BNPP compliance and legal
employees.

The illegal transactions went through a network of satellite banks where BNP’s accounts were
essentially nested. This scheme allowed BNPP to disguise its own role and the sanctioned
entities’ roles in the payments to and from financial institutions in the United States. This
activity was flagged internally in August 2005, when a senior compliance officer at BNPP
warned several legal, business, and compliance personnel at BNPP’s Geneva office that these
accounts were being used to evade US sanctions. The senior compliance officer noted: “As I
understand it, we have a number of Arab Banks (nine identified) on our books that only carry
out clearing transactions for Sudanese banks in dollars This practice effectively means that we
are circumventing the US embargo on transactions in [US dollars] by Sudan.”

In several interviews that happened before the final decision by the Department of Justice,
government officials noted that BNPP’s staff outside of the United States were not fully aware
that the transactions they conducted in Europe breached sanctions. It took time for full
awareness to develop within the institution. According to the email excerpt, individuals within

the compliance group were aware and tried to alert others, including management, to no
avail.68. 69, 70, 71

 

58 “BNP Paribas agrees to plead guilty and to pay $8.9 billion for illegally processing financial
transactions for countries subject to U.S. economic sanctions,” US Department of Justice, June 30, 2014.

69 “Settlement agreement between the Office of Foreign Assets Control and BNP Paribas SA,”
Department of the Treasury, June 30, 2014.

70 “BNP Paribas sentenced for conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
and the Trading with the Enemy Act,” US Department
of Justice, May 1, 2015.

71 Brett Wolf, “BNP’s misuse of ‘satellite banks’ may portend future enforcement over ‘nested’
correspondent accounts,” Thomson Reuters, March 27, 2014.

CGSS Page 100
Version 1.531
The following is a list of root causes of the noncompliance:
e Acompany prioritized commercial gain over compliance with the relevant laws.

e Other financial institutions were willing to participate in the scheme to disguise or omit
information.

e There was a lack of coordination between the compliance and legal areas of the bank and
with the senior leaders. A cohesive compliance governance framework was also missing.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> It’s important for an organization to fully understand the strength of its compliance
program and business practices, who its customers are and will be, and what type of
payments will flow through their accounts.

> Anorganization’s AML and sanctions compliance program will be effective only if senior
managers listen to those communicating with them.

> Sanctions are most effective when multiple jurisdictions apply the same restrictions,
reducing the avenues from which noncompliant activity is likely to come.

OFFERING DOWNSTREAM SERVICES

The BNP Paribas Bank (BNPP) case involved stripping and splitting of SWIFT messages,
internal employee fraud, and downstream correspondent banking to obscure the entities
involved. Correspondent banking arrangements carry particular risks, one being downstream
services. Often correspondent banks expect to process transactions on behalf of their
respondent banks and their respondent banks’ customers. But ifthe respondent bank itself
offers services to other banks that offer services to their customers and other banks, then the
original correspondent has much greater risk than it foresaw when it opened an account for
its respondent.

Because of this, most jurisdictions’ AML regulations require that an increased level of due
diligence be applied, particularly when a correspondent bank is providing services toa
respondent bank in another country. The business purpose for such arrangements is
legitimate. The correspondent bank will provide clearing services or products to its
downstream correspondent that the originating bank wouldn't be able to access on its own,
such as clearing USD checks for a foreign bank, or processing funds transfers through the in-
country RTGS system for a bank that doesn’t have access to that system.

Within such account arrangements, it is possible for the downstream respondent bank or
other financial institution to process its customer’s transactions through the upstream
correspondent. Under ordinary circumstances, the downstream correspondent will supply
whatever identifying information is required, and legitimate transactions will be processed.
However, if the downstream correspondent has a motive to evade sanctions for one of its
customers, or its customer conceals information before presenting the transaction for

CGSS Page 101
Version 1.531
processing, then the upstream correspondent bank is exposed. That bank will process a
transaction for which it has incomplete or incorrect information, and it could unwittingly
participate in sanctions evasion.

Figure 9: Perceived Risk — Downstream Services

Respondent bank HIGH risk
country

Perceived Risk

_~_ a
Oi <— Tit

Correspondent bank LOW risk Respondent bank LOW risk country
country

Respondent bank MEDIUM
risk country

 

Respondent bank LOW risk
country

» & 2

In order to protect itself, a bank offering downstream correspondent services should develop
an effective due diligence process for correspondent banking customers to adequately assess
the risk presented by each one. This risk profile may be a combination of the following factors:

e The size of the downstream bank customer
e The anticipated transaction volume
e The products being accessed

e The type of customer profile the downstream bank has (that will be sending transactions
through the upstream correspondent)

e The strength of the downstream correspondent’s AML and sanctions program
e The regulatory jurisdiction the downstream correspondent is under

e The geographic scope of their business—both the downstream correspondent’s location
and where its customers do business.

By quantifying these factors up front and reviewing them regularly, the upstream
correspondent will be far more likely to foresee a problem or identify unusual activity sooner
rather than later.

CGSS Page 102
Version 1.531
Evasion Attempts by Internal Staff

In addition to stripping, there are other methods that internal staff can employ to intentionally
evade sanctions, such as whitelisting sanctioned individuals or entities.

Sanctions programs rely on automatic screening of customer and transaction information for
locations, business names, and individual names against government-provided information.
There is a high possibility of false-positive results from such automated screening. In other
words, a person or entity that is not ona sanctions list gets flagged for having a similar name.
For efficiency’s sake, a known false positive result can be whitelisted so that personnel do not
waste time reviewing the same information repeatedly. An employee could potentially
whitelist a sanctioned business or individual, thus allowing payments and other transactions
to pass through unflagged.

Regulators have been clear that deliberate circumvention of sanctions will be dealt with
harshly, with criminal penalties, larger institutional fines, and harsher punishments. Recent
enforcement actions show that this is true.

Organizations should have an internal escalation process for any suspicious employee
behavior, and employees should be aware of how to follow this process.

Trade-Related Evasion Methods

Various tactics are used to evade trade restrictions or embargoes. These tactics can be used on
their own or in combination with other tactics.

CONCEALMENT

Sanctions evaders depend on concealment to avoid sanctions, fines, and scandal. They may
disguise the origin point of certain goods or funds. Or they may hide the identity of the
receiver of goods.

Concealing an End User’s Identity

It’s possible for sanctions evaders to structure transactions so that the exporter and others
involved in processing a shipment are unaware of the ultimate destination, user, and use for
the product. In these cases, the intent may be to conceal the identity of the ultimate purchaser
of a given item. Or, in the case of certain dual-use products, the intent may be to conceal the
manner in which the products will be used.

CGSS Page 103
Version 1.531
Sanctions evaders have different ways to conceal the end user’s identity or the product’s end
use. These methods include the following:

e The sanctions evader may use a straw buyer in another jurisdiction to buy the
merchandise and then complete a separate shipment or purchase after the export has
occurred.

e The evader may falsify the name of the purchaser or end user to avoid detection.

e The evader may falsely state the purpose or intended use of the item in purchase orders,
transport documentation, and other documents related to the transaction.

Arms, ammunition, and certain other sensitive merchandise require an end user certificate or
attestation that the goods will not be further sold or shipped. This certificate or attestation is
subject to verification by regulatory authorities. If the purchaser’s intent is to defraud,
however, this certificate will simply be another document with false information.

For trade-based transactions, which include more documentation, concealment may take
many forms:

e Obscuring the origin of merchandise
e Obscuring the path ofa vessel
e Transferring letters of credit

e Removing the names of financial institutions involved in the backing instrument, whether
through careful construction of alternate information or falsification of the documents
themselves

TRANSSHIPMENT

Another evasion tactic is the transshipment of goods. Transshipment is the delivery of goods
or containers to an intermediate destination and then on to a further or final destination. It
can also mean a change of carrier or vessel.

Transshipment can bea necessary step to reach the destination, as witha port inland ona
river. In this example, an ocean vessel may not be able to navigate river waters, making
transshipment necessary by a smaller vessel, a truck, or a train. For this reason, transshipment
is not always a sign of sanctions evasion.

A number of jurisdictions have strict regulations concerning the transshipment or transit of
goods through sanctioned jurisdictions. Under some sanctions restrictions, goods that are
transshipped to a sanctioned jurisdiction are then treated as if they originated from that
jurisdiction. For example, under the OFAC Iran sanctions, no goods can be imported into the
United States if they are transshipped by way of Iran without prior authorization.

Transshipment can be difficult to spot, regardless of whether the transshipped items are tiny
(such as machine parts) or large (such as machine guns). One well-known example involved

CGSS Page 104
Version 1.531
transshipping an aircraft to Iran. The case involved attempted concealment through a freight
forwarder. Ali Asghar Manzarpour was the director of Preston Technical Services, Ltd. In July
2007, the US Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) charged him with three violations ofthe
Export Administration Regulations, issued under the Export Administration Act of 1979, as
amended. The charges alleged that on or about April 28, 2004, Manzarpour coordinated the
export of a single-engine aircraft to Iran without the required export authorization.

Manzarpour ordered a freight-forwarding company to ship the aircraft from the United States
to the United Kingdom. He knew Iran was the ultimate destination. Manzarpour then
instructed the freight forwarder to transship the item to Iran, but the shipment was stopped
before leaving the United Kingdom. According to section 560.204 of the Iranian Transactions
and Sanctions Regulations maintained by OFAC, the export of an item to a third country
intended for transshipment to Iran is a transaction that requires authorization from OFAC.
Manzarpour did not get OFAC authorization for the export. BIS charged that Manzarpour
violated the regulations.72

Manzarpour violated the regulations by buying the plane and intending to export it from the
United States to Iran through the United Kingdom. He planned to do this even though he knew
that he did not have authorization from the US government and that doing so would violate
the regulations. Manzarpour told UK customs authorities that he was aware the plane could
not be exported from the United States to Iran. He acted through his companies, Preston
Technical Services Ltd.-UK and Baronmode, Ltd.-UK.

The US government charged Manzarpour with acting with intent to evade the regulations. An
Administrative Law Judge of the US Coast Guard issued a final ruling in February 2008
upholding the BIS recommendation that Manzarpour be denied export privileges under the
regulations for 20 years.

 

72°73 FR 12073.

CGSS Page 105
Version 1.531
Figure 10: Transshipment

 

eh éy*oe OO FI

CASE EXAMPLE: BLUE SKY BLUE SEA, 2017

CASE SUMMARY

In August 2017, OFAC announced a $518,063 settlement with Blue Sky Blue Sea, Inc. The
company was doing business as American Export Lines and International Shipping Company
(USA) of Los Angeles, California, referred to as AEL. The agreement settled AEL’s potential
civil liability for 140 apparent violations of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations
(ITSR).

Between April 2010 and June 2012, AEL appears to have violated the ITSR by transshipping
used and junked cars and parts from the United States through Iran to Afghanistan on 140
occasions. Although there was an OFAC compliance program in place at the time, AEL failed to
disclose to OFAC in advance that it was planning to ship these goods through Iran.

AEL did not self-disclose the violations to OFAC. Despite this, the company addressed the
violations internally before the OFAC investigation began. AEL did this by amending its policy
to address the gap and ceasing any such transshipments.

The United States investigation determined that AEL’s president and co-owner knew of and
approved the transshipments. The goods didn’t have an end-use or an end-user in Iran, which
was a mitigating factor. However, the government concluded that AEL still violated the

CGSS Page 106
Version 1.531
sanctions. By making the transshipments, AEL enriched the economy of Iran and
demonstrated a reckless disregard for sanctions law.73 74, 75

The following is a list of root causes of the noncompliance:

e AEL’s OFAC compliance program was ineffective. Although a program was in place, it was
either inadequate and didn’t address the issue of transshipment through Iran, or
individuals could override it without difficulty or consequence.

e AEL lacked a compliance culture. Management decided that compliance with this
regulation was nota priority.

e AEL and its employees did not fully understand current sanctions regulations.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Itis vital for an organization to understand the implications of all restrictions that could
affect its business and its customers.

> When an organization uncovers a problem with its compliance, addressing it internally
isn’t always enough. Had AEL completed a self-disclosure of this behavior to OFAC, the
result would probably have been a lower fine or no fine at all.

> Anorganization must ensure its sanctions compliance program is current and complete. It
should keep track of any and all changes to laws and sanctions and adapt its program
accordingly. These measures will prevent any unintentional violations.

Evasion through Consolidation of Goods

There are a few types of transshipment evasion tactics. Some evaders hide prohibited or
restricted goods through consolidation. In other words, they group small shipments into one
larger one, or they mix restricted items with other goods and do not declare those restricted
items in shipping documentation.

The Internet has made it somewhat easier to make business contacts around the world.
However, the practice of evading sanctions by hiding a restricted shipment within an
unrestricted one, or hiding a small amount of contraband among innocuous goods, has existed
for centuries. As long as there have been smugglers, there has been consolidation.

 

73 “Settlement agreement between the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets
Control and Blue Sky Blue Sea, Inc., doing business as American Export Lines and International
Shipping Company (USA),” US Department of the Treasury, August 17, 2017.

74 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for August 17, 2017.

75 Michael O’Kane, “OFAC fines American Export Lines for violating U.S. sanctions on Iran,”
EuropeanSanctions.com, August 18, 2017.

CGSS Page 107
Version 1.531
When sanctions evaders ship something they want to go unnoticed or undetected, the key is to
avoid or minimize inspection. For example, ifthe goods disguising the restricted shipment are
heavy, difficult to move, or messy in some way, they may better conceal what evaders don’t
want the customs officials to see. Disguising goods may include live plants or crates of
vegetables that are fragile and would break down with too close inspection. Imagine a
shipment of machine parts in small boxes, concealed beneath pallets of scrap metal or gravel.
It would be extremely difficult for inspectors to move those pallets and detect the restricted
goods.

Technology made consolidation easier in some ways. The anonymous and often untraceable
parts of the Internet called the Dark Web can make it easier for sanctions evaders to advertise
their willingness to engage in activity that breaks the law. However, sanctions evasion still
requires a level of trust between parties. This trust can only be established through contact
and time or through an introduction from a trusted individual.

In other ways, technology has made consolidation more difficult. Advances in merchandise
marking, tracking, and technology have enhanced the security of goods in transport. These
advances leave fewer openings for manipulation ofthe system.

There is potential for an increase in shipment consolidation to evade sanctions. Certain goods
will always be subject to consolidation due to global restrictions; weapons area prime
example. Still, advances in technology for goods tracking, life cycle monitoring of merchandise,
and government use of technology in the global shipment arena will present new challenges to
the bad actors.

One example of evasion through consolidation is the case of David Wu. In August 2015, the US
Department of Justice sentenced him to 10 months of imprisonment for violating restrictions
relating to the export of arms equipment. Wu tried to arrange for the purchase of this
equipment in the United States in order to ship it to China. He planned to conceal the
equipment in another shipment that contained construction supplies for building houses.

Using a Neutral Jurisdiction or Country

Another evasion tactic is to arrange for goods to be shipped, transferred, or otherwise sent
onward from a “neutral” transit jurisdiction. These tend to be countries where export controls
are perceived to be more robust and reliable. This tactic can provide a false sense of security
because it’s assumed that local authorities have checked and approved goods shipped from
these locations. Using this type of transit jurisdiction can help obscure the origin of goods. It
can also help evaders escape detection by sanctions screening tools that might otherwise raise
a red flag about the jurisdiction involved.

An example of attempting to use a neutral jurisdiction is the case of Syed Vaqar Ashraf. In
2016, Ashraf was sentenced to 33 months of imprisonment for trying to ship restricted goods
from the United States without a license. He arranged for the goods to be shipped to Belgium.
The goods were then to be shipped to Pakistan for use by Pakistan’s military. Belgian police
caught Ashraf before he was able to do so.

CGSS Page 108
Version 1.531
Switching Cargo on the Open Sea

Ocean cargo vessels must maintain detailed records of their route. They must specify which
ports they stopped at and where they loaded or offloaded cargo. How do these vessels deliver
cargo to a sanctioned destination without leaving a record of their presence?

A ship from the selling country will arrange with a ship from the sanctioned location to meet
in international waters, beyond the jurisdiction of any of the surrounding countries’ coast
guard or naval forces. Then the ships will transfer the cargo on the open water. The goods
have documentation bearing a false destination and perhaps a false buyer. Or they may not be
listed on the sending ship’s cargo manifest at all in order to avoid questions. There may also be
a false entry showing delivery ata false destination. To avoid electronic traces of the meeting,
both ships will turn off their Automatic Identification System (AIS) transponders, a process
known as “loitering.” This means details of their precise location are not transmitted and do
not alert any authorities to their coordinated meeting.

In the past, transponders measured only the amount of time the transponder was off. In some
cases, ships could blame a lack of transponder information on their route and a poor signal.
However, this method of trying to remain unseen may be coming to an end. International
surveillance satellites record images of ships and provide analysis to government agencies.
Governments around the globe are beginning to use such surveillance methods to track
oceangoing traffic from sanctioned countries, such as Iran and North Korea. Governments can
identify when ships leave their ports, where they head, and whom they meet. It is even
possible to analyze the direction of cargo transfer based on shadows of the cargo ships that
show how low they sit in the water.

International Efforts to Detect Loitering

A transponder signals a ship’s location. It also conveys its course, speed, and cargo, and it
reveals in what country the ship is registered, along with a great deal of other information.
Ships use transponders to prevent collisions and to indicate their location in case of
emergency. Governments insist that ships use transponders to make smuggling more difficult.
However, some cargo ships turn off their transponders to avoid revealing what their cargo is
and where they are headed, a process known as “loitering.”

Another concern for shipping is “spoofing.” Spoofing is when a ship continues to transmit AIS
data while hiding its identity or manipulating its location. This occurs through the
manipulation of AIS data. Spoofing can be done by forcing a stronger signal to override the AIS
transmitted signal or through other hacking means.

In April 2019, a reporter was allowed to sail aboard the U.S.S. Milius, a destroyer that seeks
out ships that have turned off their transponders. The crew of the Milius discovered two ships
that were suspected of secretly transferring oil to a tanker bound for North Korea. All three
ships had turned off their transponders and communicated by radio.

CGSS Page 109
Version 1.531
The United Nations strictly limits petroleum to North Korea because of the country’s nuclear
program, cyberattacks, human rights violations, and money laundering. The United Nations
reported that North Korea imported more than seven times its limit of petroleum in 2018.

Although the Milius is equipped with cruise missiles and other weapons, when it finds a ship
that has turned off its transponder, it does not attack. Instead, it passes its information to
analysts, who try to identify the owner of the vessel. It also sends information about apparent
sanctions violations to the United Nations. As a consequence, the United Nations may ban
certain ships from international ports and blacklist the owners and operators of the ships.

One of the ships the Milius found during the reporter’s visit was a tanker named the Oceanic
Success. The ship’s transponder had been switched off for more than a month at the time it
encountered the Milius. The Oceanic Success was registered in Mongolia, managed by a
Taiwanese firm, and owned by a business in Hong Kong. The reporter’s newspaper tried and
failed to track down the ship’s owner.

In addition to the United States, seven other countries provide ships and planes to monitor
sanctions violations. Japan, South Korea, France, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand,
and Canada help monitor areas where illegal transfers often happen.

FALSIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS

Sanctions evaders often falsify commercial invoices, bills of lading, and cargo manifests to
conceal shipment contents or destinations that would arouse suspicion or trigger sanctions
controls. The physical merchandise is seen only when packaged and unpackaged, or if
authorities make a random inspection. At all other times, the documentation (whether in hard
copy or electronic) representing the shipment is taken at face value. So when an evader
falsifies details, shipments “fly below the radar,” with the contraband goods or sanctioned
parties involved passing unnoticed.

Spot checks by customs authorities identify some fraud. However, thousands of containers of
goods pass through ocean ports around the world daily. Therefore, authorities rely on every
party involved ina trade transaction to consider all other parties and all details involved in the
transaction and to identify when something seems out of place.

CASE EXAMPLE: ACCESS USA SHIPPING LLC, 2017

CASE SUMMARY

In March 2017, the BIS fined Access USA Shipping LLC (doing business as MYUS), a Florida-
based US shipping company, $27 million for violations of the Export Administration
Regulations (EAR). These violations included evasion activity.

Access USA was a package forwarding company. It provided foreign customers with a US-
based address and warehouse space in which to store goods bought from US merchants.

CGSS Page 110
Version 1.531
Access would then manage the necessary shipping logistics to export the goods on behalf of its
customers.

The company was charged with 150 violations of EAR, beginning in April 2011 and continuing
through 2013. Their actions included 129 instances of allowing their overseas customers to
buy goods subject to EAR from US companies that did not know the goods were intended for
export. The company altered documents to include deliberate inaccuracies in the value and
description of the goods. Access USA also falsified export control documents. In addition, the
company failed to maintain records required for exports.

Access USA gave international customers a “suite” within Access’ US warehouse and a US
address to receive goods. Once the goods arrived, Access employees would record receipt and
the nature of goods accurately. However, they revised the information before export, changing
the description and reducing the value to avoid US export control scrutiny. In some instances,
Access employees removed packaging and labeling before export.

Access also offered a “personal shopper” program. In this scheme, the company presented an
Access employee to the US companies from which goods were purchased. Access falsely
claimed that the employee was actually the buyer. When sellers expressed concerns or
reluctance to sell to foreign buyers, Access falsely presented an employee as the end user. In
effect, Access set up a straw buyer for a fee. The company made these purchases in the name
of Eric Baird, who was then CEO of Access.

In December 2018, the US government indicted Baird. He pleaded guilty to one count of felony
smuggling and 166 administrative violations of US export control laws. The plea was part ofa
global settlement with the US DOJ and BIS. BIS issued an order outlining the administrative
violations and imposing civil penalties of $17 million, with $7 million suspended, and a 5-year
denial of export privileges. The civil penalty was the largest to be paid by an individual in BIS
history.

Baird admitted to violations of the EAR committed from August 1, 2011, through January 7,
2013, during his tenure as CEO of Access USA Shipping, LLC. Under his direction, Access
developed practices and policies that made it easier to conceal goods from US merchants.
While Baird ran the company, Access also falsified documents before exporting goods. The
activities that Baird knowingly authorized or participated in resulted in unlicensed exports of
controlled items to various countries. The activities also resulted in repeated false statements
on Automated Export System (AES) filings.

As early as September 2011, Baird was made aware that undervaluing violated US export
laws, including the EAR. Baird received emails on this subject from his chief technology officer,
who stated, “I know we are WILLINGLY AND INTENTIONALLY breaking the law.” In the same
email chain, Baird suggested that Access USA could falsely reduce the value of items by 25%
on export control documentation submitted to the US government and if “warned by [the US]
government,” then the company “can stop ASAP.” This demonstrated a willingness to skirt the
law until detected.

CGSS Page 111
Version 1.531
Access used a variety of tactics to help its foreign customers buy and export goods from US
merchants and evade trade restrictions. For example, it changed the item descriptions on
shipping documents. It described rifle scopes as “sporting goods” and listed rifle stocks and
grips as “toy accessories.” Access also removed US merchant invoices that identified the goods
involved. It falsely used the names of its own employees as purchasers and end-users. And it
amended records to make it seem as if shipments had been delivered to US recipients.”® 77

The root causes of the noncompliance included:

0 A flagrant disregard for the laws and regulations governing exports from the United States,
as shown in the emails quoted above

® Aseeming lack of understanding of the consequences for violating export regulations

0 Lack of any internal controls to ensure compliance with export regulations, including
knowledge or training on the part of staff

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> This case illustrates the importance of truly knowing a customer. Had the US companies
done thorough due diligence when selling to Access or any of their foreign customers, they
would have discovered the nature of the warehouse and likely uncovered the third-party
nature of the shipping arrangement.

> Inspite of detailed export regulations, documentation requirements, licensing, and so on,
those determined to flout the regulations will find a structure that allows them to do so,
even if only for a limited time.

> Any business engaged in trade must conduct thorough due diligence, particularly if the
business trades in any controlled merchandise.

Concealing the Final Destination of Goods

Sanctions evaders can forge financial documentation, such as bills of lading, sales orders, and
invoices to suggest that the final destination is different from the actual one. They can also
falsify information about the actual transportation route. When this happens, the goods go
indirectly to a sanctioned territory.

Another way of concealing the final destination of goods happens when sanctions evaders use
an agent or straw buyer in an unsanctioned jurisdiction. This individual or entity may contract

 

76 “Former Florida CEO pleads guilty to export violations and agrees to pay record $17 million to
Department of Commerce,” US Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, December
14, 2018.

77 “Order relating to Access USA Shipping, LLC, doing business as MyUS.com,” US Department of
Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, February 9, 2017.

CGSS Page 112
Version 1.531
for the goods, or the ultimate buyer may contract in their name. In either case, the exporter is
unaware of the final buyer or destination. Goods ship to the named destination, and then, after
a brief stint in a warehouse during which the original exporter believes the transaction to be
concluded, the goods ship on to their further destination. Other methods of concealing goods’
final destination include using smaller vessels to ship the merchandise onward, transferring
goods from ship to ship in international waters, and making an unscheduled stop ina
sanctioned port.

CASE EXAMPLE: TECHNOPROMEXPORT, 2017

CASE SUMMARY

Several governments have imposed sectoral sanctions on certain Russian entities. These
include specific prohibitions against the supply of equipment for certain infrastructure
projects in Crimea and Sevastopol. The restrictions also include limits on the supply of
equipment for certain infrastructure projects in the energy sector.

Early in 2014, both the European Union and the United States began imposing visa restrictions
and asset freezes on Russian officials and companies because of the crisis in Ukraine.
Throughout the year as the Crimean crisis developed, the list of sanctioned individuals and
entities grew, targeting Russia’s ability to import goods that would contribute to their military
capacity as well as their energy sector, and then expanded to banks and arms companies.

By December 2014, the European Union and the United States had prohibited all imports from
and to Crimea. The list of sanctioned officials and companies continued to grow, now targeting
construction companies and other industries.

In 2015 and 2016, a company in Europe (Siemens) entered into an agreement with a Russian
state-owned company called Technopromexport. The agreement was for the supply of seven
gas turbines for use at an energy project in Taman, in the Krasnodar region of Russia. Siemens
delivered four turbines in accordance with the contract.

As part of the transaction, Technopromexport warranted that the final destination for the
turbines would not be Crimea, as this would violate the Crimea-specific sanctions. However,
Technopromexport’s true intention was to use the turbines in an energy project in Crimea, in
violation of the EU sanctions. The four turbines that had been delivered to Russia were
shipped by Technopromexport to Crimea. Upon learning this, Siemens tried unsuccessfully to
sue Technopromexport in Russia to obtain release from the sales contract and the option for
the remaining three turbines. Siemens cooperated fully with authorities. As a result of this

CGSS Page 113
Version 1.531
case, the EU added three individuals and three legal entities to its Russian sanctions list for
violating the restrictions relating to Crimea.78: 79, 80

Figure 11: Technopromexport Example

 

pigs |

 

Actual delivery

 

RW

Contract terms

pg

Purchase of gas turbines

 

The following is a list of root causes of the noncompliance:

e Technopromexport’s intent was likely always to use the contracted goods in Crimea,
although at the time the contract was initially drawn up, the restrictions did not yet affect
this industry sector. Since all sanctions were related to Russia’s actions in Ukraine and the
company was state owned, Technopromexport was able to foresee the continued
difficulties.

e Since Technopromexport is state-owned, its actions are likely to fall in line with those of
the Russian government. Therefore, Siemens should have known the violation of contract
terms was possible—unless Siemens did not perform sufficient due diligence on its buyer.

e Siemens had no ability to force compliance with the contract once the goods had been
delivered.

 

78 “U.S. sanctions on Russia: An overview,” Congressional Research Service, January 2, 2019.

79 “Treasury sanctions additional individuals and entities in connection with the conflict in Ukraine and
Russia’s occupation of Crimea,” US Department
of the Treasury, January 26, 2018.

80 Three Siemens employees investigated over turbines in Crimea,” Reuters, November 29, 2018.

CGSS Page 114
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS
> The presence of state ownership can affect an individual’s or a company’s actions.

> Acontract or transaction, although not originally in violation of any sanctions, may now
violate relevant laws or regulations.

> Itis crucial to be aware of the environment in which an organization is conducting
business and to stay abreast of all changes. Otherwise, sanctions may be unintentionally
violated.

Back-to-Back Letters of Credit

Another evasion technique you may encounter is back-to-back letters of credit. In this
situation, Bank A issues a letter of credit as collateral to Bank B in order to issue a separate
letter of credit to the beneficiary. This often happens when the underlying agreement between
the applicant and beneficiary contains restrictions about the credit quality of the bank that is
issuing the letter of credit, the location of the issuing bank, or other stipulations that prevent
the applicant’s bank from issuing a direct letter of credit to the beneficiary.

A sanctions evader can use a back-to-back letter of credit to remove the name ofa sanctioned
bank from the documentation more effectively than would be possible with a transferred
letter of credit. (A transferred letter of credit is one that Bank A issues in favor of Bank B. Bank
B then “transfers” the letter of credit through an advising bank, Bank C, to the ultimate
beneficiary.) With a back-to-back letter of credit, the beneficiary receives a letter of credit
from an unsanctioned bank without mention of the original issuing bank. The beneficiary may
not even know that a sanctioned institution is involved in the transaction.

An organization can avoid taking part in this type of sanctions violation by watching out for
these red flags: instructions to amend the terms, alter the destination of goods, change the
name ofa vessel, remove a bank or applicant name, or change a bank or applicant name. Any
of these directions requires further investigation.

The bank named as beneficiary on the initial letter of credit would need to be complicit in this
arrangement, or at least negligent, in order to remove all mention of the sanctioned institution
from the outgoing letter of credit. It’s crucial for banks that operate in multiple jurisdictions to
understand the sanctions that apply to the local jurisdiction as well as those that apply to
other jurisdictions where customers transact, and where the institution may also have
responsibilities.

Exporting without a License

Export licenses are required based on the destination for the shipment, the type of goods
being exported, or both these factors. To avoid the requirement for the license, an importer or
exporter may disguise the true destination for the goods. The importer or exporter will list the
final destination as a neutral country for which a license isn’t required. Then the importer or

CGSS Page 115
Version 1.531
exporter will ship the goods to the restricted or sanctioned destination at a later date. The
shipping could take place either directly or through an agent.

What if the goods themselves require the license? To avoid the required license, the importer
or exporter may misstate the purpose or use of the goods, in the case of dual-use merchandise.
Examples of dual-use merchandise include lasers, sensors, navigation equipment, chemicals,
microorganisms, and toxins.

What if the purpose of the goods cannot be disguised? In that case, the importer or exporter
may falsify information outright on the documentation for the shipment. For example, they
might list precision machine parts as scrap metal.

In 2016, the United States imprisoned and fined several individuals for violating US trade
restrictions relating to microelectronics. The group developed a scheme to export these goods
illegally from the United States without getting the required licenses. As part of this scheme,
the group used US-based front companies to buy the goods and then arranged for their
shipment to Russian end users.

CASE EXAMPLE: EMENIKE NWANKWOALA, 2011

CASE SUMMARY

In January 2011, a Maryland judge sentenced Emenike Nwankwoala, a former state probation
officer, to 37 months in prison in accordance with a plea agreement. His crimes included
exporting arms without a license, exporting controlled goods without a license, and delivering
a gun toa carrier without proper notification. The investigation into his conduct involved
Homeland Security, ICE, US Customs and Border Protection, and the commerce department’s
Export Enforcement office.

According to the US attorney for the case, Nwankwoala exported arms to Nigeria for a decade.
He had no export license and no license to operate as an arms dealer. Nwankwoala smuggled
the arms by falsifying the contents of shipping containers and providing false information
about their destination.

After being granted a license to send one shotgun to Nigeria for personal use, Nwankwoala
applied for a broader license to send a number of guns to a shooting range. This second license
was denied because he couldn’t identify the end user of the weapons. He shipped the arms
without the required license by concealing them in shipping containers with cars, hospital
beds, and other unregulated contents. He reported this scheme to an undercover ICE agent
during that agency’s investigation.

Nwankwoala at first tried to get the required licenses. When this proved difficult, he simply
lied to get around the regulations. To purchase weapons in bulk, Nwankwoala falsely informed
some sellers that he had an export license and was supplying guns to a shooting range in
Nigeria. He concealed multiple shipments between 2006 and 2009 in containers labeled as
“household goods” or “used equipment.” One such shipment was detected and confiscated in
Spain, where the weapons were traced to Nwankwoala as the purchaser.

CGSS Page 116
Version 1.531
This case shows how one person with the intent to deceive can evade export controls multiple
times simply by falsifying documents. It can take years and significant resources to identify the
bad actor. The international shipment industry relies on accurate and truthful completion of
documents, and the resources or method to verify each and every shipment simply are not
available or practical. Nwankwoala’s case shows how vulnerable the system can be.®!

Rick Shimon, the special agent in charge of the Washington field office of the Office of Export
Enforcement, stated, “This is an especially egregious crime given that a criminal justice official
entrusted with upholding the law smuggled weapons out of the country.”

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> What red flags from Nwankwoala’s case can apply to other possible cases of sanctions
evasion? Employees of financial institutions should exercise caution in any of these
situations:

> Theclient or potential client cannot identify the shipment’s end user.

> Theclient or potential client classifies goods in general terms, such as “used equipment” or
“household items.”

Vv

The client or potential client falsifies documents.

Vv

The client or potential client makes claims with little or no credible documentation.

> Nwankwola’s false claim was that he had an export license.

USE OF FRONT AND SHELL COMPANIES

Evaders often use front companies and shell companies to conceal the identity of end users or
the final destination where the goods are really being shipped. What is the difference between
these terms? A front company is an entity that is meant to shield another company from
liability or scrutiny. A shell company is a company without active business or significant
assets. Shell companies are legal, but people sometimes use them illegitimately—for instance,
to disguise business ownership.

Evaders can use these entities to hide the identity of end-users or the final destination of
goods. For example, evaders can incorporate a front or shell company ina third country and
arrange for citizens of that third country to manage it. This can make it seem as though the
company buying the goods—in other words, the end-user—is operating in a third country.
When an entity is managed by an administration business based in another jurisdiction, front
or shell companies give that entity a registered address and perhaps a bank account in that
jurisdiction.

 

81 “Former Maryland Probation Officer Sentenced to Over Three Years In Prison For Illegally Exporting
Guns And Ammunition To Nigeria,” US Department of Justice, January 3, 2011.

CGSS Page 117
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE: TRANS MERITS CO,, 2014

CASE SUMMARY

In October 2014, Alex H. T. Tsai and his son Yueh-Hsun (Gary) Tsai were arrested and charged
with conspiring to defraud the United States in its enforcement of laws and regulations
prohibiting the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Alex Tsai was connected with
three companies based in Taiwan: Global Interface Company, Inc.; Trans Merits Co., Ltd.; and
Trans Multi Mechanics Co., Ltd. These companies procured precision metalworking machinery
and dual-use equipment from the United States and other countries for export to North
Korea’s primary arms dealer, the Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID).
The United Nations and the US Department of the Treasury designated KOMID as a sanctioned
entity in 2009.

Alex Tsai and his company Trans Merits Co. were designated in 2009 for involvement with the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. From this point on, it was illegal for any US
person to do business with either Alex Tsai or Trans Merits. Despite this, Gary Tsai established
a US-based “front company” to conceal the involvement of his father and continue the
business.

Next, the companies and individuals began a concerted effort to continue the export of
equipment to North Korea. They removed Alex Tsai’s name, and that of Trans Merits, to evade
detection by sanctions screening filters. Alex Tsai transmitted funds into the United States
through a third party to conceal his involvement. Gary Tsai helped his father conduct business
under other company names by falsifying invoices and shipment documents to conceal the
involvement of the listed companies. Both pleaded guilty.®82

KEY TAKEAWAYS:

> The type of fraud that Alex and Gary Tsai perpetrated can be difficult to detect. The best
way to arm oneself is to have full information for customers. In this case, the close relative
ofan OFAC SDN was able to continue the illicit activities. Additional due diligence into
Gary Tsai’s business activities might have brought his actions to light sooner.

> Itis important to know who customers are, and identify any connections to other
companies or any cross-connections between other individuals and other organizations. In
this way, shell companies, front companies, and patterns can be detected as early as
possible. Third-party due diligence systems can be key to this type of connected
information.

 

82 “Taiwanese Businessman Pleads Guilty To Conspiring To Violate U.S. Laws Preventing Proliferation Of
Weapons Of Mass Destruction,” US Department of Justice, October 10, 2014.

CGSS Page 118
Version 1.531
> What red flags from this case can apply to other possible cases of sanctions evasion?

> Employees of financial institutions should exercise caution in any of these situations:

> The client or potential client falsifies documents.
> The client or potential client procures dual-use equipment.

> The client or potential client is designated for involvement with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

> The client or potential client establishes a front or shell company.

In Search of a Clean Business Record

People also use shell and front companies to evade sanctions because these companies have
“clean” business records. Actually, they have no business records. Because they have never
actually done business, there is no adverse information that might call into question the role of
these companies in a trade transaction. Some evaders use a front company that has a business
record. However, the historical business activities appear relatively low risk froma sanctions
perspective.

Some investors use “shelf” or “aged” companies to gain a clean business record. Unlike a shell
company, a shelf company has been created months or years ahead of time, often by a law firm
or an accounting firm. Then the company goes “on the shelf” until needed. A company with an
older date of incorporation often seems more reliable and is less likely to raise red flags.
Jurisdictions that have more relaxed corporate laws can provide easy access to this setup
through local attorneys or government officials.

To detect attempts at evasion, employees and owners ofa business must understand the
nature, purpose, and structure of its customers’ and counterparties’ relationships and the
reasons for the activities they engage in. When we understand who owns and controls our
customers, we can better discern whether the proposed business makes sense for their
business model—or whether there could be another motive for a customer’s behavior.

CASE EXAMPLE: ZTE, 2018

CASE SUMMARY

ZTE is a large telecom equipment company. The United States government imposed a trading
ban on the company after it breached US sanctions on trade with Iran and North Korea and
pleaded guilty to criminal conduct in conspiring to violate the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act (IEEPA). After the ban, the company nearly collapsed. ZTE paid a $1
billion fine and put another $400 million in escrow. It remained under close scrutiny even
after these payments.

CGSS Page 119
Version 1.531
Between 2010 and 2016, ZTE contracted with Iranian companies to supply
telecommunications equipment. To hide the illegal export of US goods to Iran, ZTE identified a
company to serve as an isolation company to purchase the US goods, reselling them to ZTE for
later transfer to Iran. ZTE supplied the isolation company with capital and took control of it to
bring this about.

ZTE agreed to supply the “self-developed equipment” to Iran, collect payments for the
projects, and manage the network. A ZTE affiliate was to supply local materials and services.
The isolation company was responsible for “relevant third-party equipment,” meaning parts
that would be subject to US export laws. ZTE intended the isolation company to insulate ZTE
from US export violations.

In spite of the plan, and although the isolation company was a party to the contracts, ZTE
purchased and shipped the US goods. They packaged the items with ZTE’s self-manufactured
items to hide the US- origin goods. ZTE did not list US items on the customs declaration forms,
though the items were included on the packing lists inside the shipments.

In 2011 ZTE determined that the use of the isolation company was not enough to hide ZTE’s
illegal goods to Iran. ZTE’s senior management created a project team to study, handle, and
address the company’s export control risks, and in September 2011, an executive memo
proposed that the company identify and establish new isolation companies to supply US parts
necessary for projects in embargoed countries. These isolation companies would conceal
ZTE’s role in the transshipment scheme and protect ZTE from sanctions control risks.

In March 2012, an article was published detailing ZTE’s sale of equipment to Iran. In the face
of this attention, ZTE temporarily stopped shipment of US goods to Iran. This pause lasted less
than two years, however, before ZTE resumed business with Iran.

At no stage did ZTE obtain the necessary export licenses from US authorities. Instead of using
the original isolation company, ZTE signed a contract with a new isolation company, which in
turn signed contracts with the Iranian customers. In this arrangement, ZTE purchased the US
goods and manufactured the balance, and then it combined them all for the new isolation
company to pick up and ship to Iran. Shipments were made in this way from January 2014
through January 2016.

Throughout this period ZTE took deliberate steps to conceal information from the US
government, in spite of the company’s awareness of various investigations. In the summer of
2012, ZTE asked each of the employees who were involved in the Iran sales to sign
nondisclosure agreements in which the employees agreed to keep confidential all information
related to the company’s US exports to Iran. ZTE made repeated false statements to internal
and external counsel that resulted in false representations to the DOJ. ZTE also concealed data
from a forensic accounting firm hired to investigate the Iran sales and report to the DOJ and US
law enforcement. The company formed a special internal department to remove all
information related to the Iran shipments from ZTE’s databases. This team’s emails were

CGSS Page 120
Version 1.531
automatically deleted each night to remove all communications related to the database
deletions.83, 84, 85, 86

The root causes of the noncompliance included:

e Deliberate structuring of the business to avoid export controls and sanctions
e Lack of a compliance culture within the firm

e Lack ofan internal sanctions compliance regime

e Failure to appreciate the seriousness of the acts of evasion being committed and the
potential consequences once exposed

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> The US companies that sold parts to ZTE should have conducted more in-depth due
diligence on the other parties to the sales contracts. The US companies could have seen the
connections to the isolation companies and could have questioned the structure of the
sales.

> The regulators showed that there will be serious consequences for institutions that fail to
cooperate with authorities, that conceal information deliberately, and that demonstrate
evasion tactics repeatedly.

> Staff must always apply the controls designed to reduce sanctions risks. If someone is
concerned about other staff members trying to evade or circumvent internal controls, that
person should immediately escalate the matter to a line manager.

 

83 “Chinese telecom giant to pay $1 billion in Iran sanctions case,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty,
June 8, 2018.

84 David J. Lynch, “U.S. companies banned from selling to China’s ZTE telecom maker,” Washington Post,
April 16, 2018.

85 “United States of America v. ZTE Corporation plea agreement,” US District Court for the Northern
District of Texas, March 6, 2017.

86 “ZTE Corporation agrees to plead guilty and pay over $430.4 million for violating U.S. sanctions by
sending U.S.-origin items to Iran,” US Department of Justice, March 7, 2017.

CGSS Page 121
Version 1.531
RED FLAGS

In summary, here are some examples of red flags that could signal trade-related evasion
techniques:

e Concealing identity: The customer’s name or address is similar to the name or address ofa
party on the BIS list of denied persons.

e Concealing restricted goods as non-restricted: The customer is reluctant to offer
information on the end use of the goods.

e Misuse ofa front or shell company, example 1: The goods do not fit the buyer’s line of
business.

e Misuse ofa front or shell company, example 2: The customer has little or no business
background.

e Misuse ofa front or shell company, example 3: The customer is unfamiliar with the
product’s performance characteristics but still wants the product.

e Concealing the end-user, the final destination, or both, example 1: Delivery dates are
vague, or deliveries are planned for out-of-the-way destinations.

e Concealing the end user, the final destination, or both, example 2: A freight-forwarding
firm is listed as the product’s end user or destination.

e Concealing the final destination or transshipment: The shipping route is abnormal for the
product or the destination.

e Concealing the end-use, the end-user, or both: When questioned, the customer is evasive
or unclear about whether the goods are for domestic use, export, or re-export.

CASE EXAMPLE: OCEAN MARITIME MANAGEMENT, 2014

CASE SUMMARY

In July 2014, Ocean Maritime Management (OMM) and Chong Chon Gang Shipping company,
both North Korean companies, were listed as sanctioned entities. They were sanctioned by the
US Department of the Treasury under Executive Order 13551, which expanded the scope of
previous North Korea-related sanctions in response to North Korea’s nuclear test, missile
launches in 2009, and the sinking of a South Korean naval vessel, the Cheonan, which killed 46
sailors in March 2010. The sanctions targeted imports of arms and related materiel by North
Korea, as well as money laundering and luxury goods. The United Nations also sanctioned
them in July 2014 under the North Korea sanctions regime for concealing a shipment of arms
and related goods from Cuba to North Korea aboard the vessel Chong Chon Gang in July 2013.

The ship contained components of surface-to-air missile systems and launchers, MiG-21
fighter jet parts and engines, shell casings, rocket-propelled projectiles, and other ammunition.

CGSS Page 122
Version 1.531
The cargo was falsely declared to be sugar and “spare plastic sacks” and was camouflaged
under bags of sugar within the ship. The crew was also directed to prepare a false declaration
to present at the Panama Canal, actions which were viewed as further evidence of intent to
deceive and evade US and UN sanctions.

OMM had operations in 10 countries. In 2015, the United Nations noted that as a result of this
listing, OMM renamed 13 of its 14 ships and transferred ownership to shell corporations in an
attempt to evade sanctions. Because of these actions, both company names and vessel names
would no longer appear on sanctions filters. Therefore, assets would not be frozen and
transactions would not be blocked. The UN Security Council reviewed these reports of
renaming, and experts emphasized the importance of monitoring and updating new names for
sanctioned entities and vessels.87 88. 89

The root causes of the noncompliance included:

e Intent to evade sanctions—specifically the red-flag actions of concealing identity by
renaming ships, misusing shell corporations, and concealing restricted goods as non-
restricted

e Self-interest

e Possible patriotic or political reasons (both companies are owned and based in North
Korea)

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Screening International Maritime Organization (IMO) numbers is an important part of the
overall process in transactions that involve ships since IMO numbers do not change.

> Those with a motive to circumvent sanctions will use whatever opportunities exist,
including disguising shipments and falsifying documents, in order to evade detection.

> Misuse of shell companies and transfer of ownership can make it challenging to detect
sanctions evaders.

> The ability of the company and its vessels to change name and ownership shows how
fragile detection methods are and how important it is to ensure that an organization
updates its lists and information frequently.

 

87 “North Korea reflagging ships to evade sanctions—UN,” BBC News, February 26, 2015.

88 “Ocean Maritime Management Company, Limited (OMM),” United Nations Security Council.

89 “Treasury sanctions DPRK shipping companies involved in illicit arms transfers,” US Department of
the Treasury, July 30, 2014.

CGSS Page 123
Version 1.531
Concealment of Beneficial Ownership

 

The most challenging method of evasion can be concealment of ownership and control
information. Sanctioned individuals and entities will often try to conceal their ownership of
various business interests so that those business interests can establish accounts and transact
business in jurisdictions where they are sanctioned. For this reason, it is vital to correctly
establish a customer’s ownership. This information must also be verified and updated
periodically.

Using Different Names

How do sanctions targets conceal their identity? One way is through using different names.
Changing the spelling, varying the order of names, or using a completely different name is a
common tactic used to conceal or make it more difficult to establish an individual’s true
identity. For instance, someone named Abu Mohamed al-Adnani might change parts of his
name to Abou, Abu-Mohammad, al Adnani, and so on. Or he might choose an entirely different
alias.

Ifa sanctioned counterparty wants to evade detection, they may change the spelling of their
name slightly. Or they may provide a false address that doesn’t exactly match the listed
information. A sanctioned individual may act through a nominee, a relative, ora
representative, making detection more difficult. If the same counterparty is appearing
multiple times during transactions, an organization may have an obligation to establish a
customer relationship and apply additional due diligence, depending on the jurisdiction and
the company’s policy. Due diligence regarding the customer should include the following:

e Determining the parties with whom they will transact
e Understanding which customers (or types of customers) they target or market to

e Determining whether a static population of customers exists that can be reviewed or
screened in advance

e Determining whether the customer’s behavior indicates attempts to evade sanctions, such
as attempts to disguise company names so they will not appear when a financial
organization screens the names against lists.

Another technique is to use generic names. The following is an example ofa sanctions target
listed on the EU sanctions list in relation to North Korea.
“Foreign Trade Bank (FTB) is a State-owned bank and acts as the DPRK’s primary foreign

exchange bank. It has provided key financial support to Kwangson Banking Corporation.”

CGSS Page 124
Version 1.531
Can you see how the use of this name might make its detection more difficult? A name like
Foreign Trade Bank might be overlooked without further investigation.

Complex Corporate Ownership Arrangements

The second major technique used to conceal identity is through the use of complex corporate
ownership schemes. It’s difficult to establish the identity of sanctions targets who are
beneficiary owners when their ownership is held through a corporate structure. Getting to the
bottom of these schemes is especially challenging when several different legal entities are part
of the ownership chain. Let’s look at some examples of how people and institutions use this
tactic to evade sanctions.

Figure 12: Complex Corporate Ownership Schemes 1

& & & &

100%
00% 00% 90%
10% 40 10% 40% 50%

50% 50% 1 1

1% 50%

60% 40%

The 50% ownership rule is important in both the United States and Europe. In the United
States, the rule is that when a business or other organization reviews the ownership ofa
customer or prospective customer, ifthat entity is owned at a 50% level or higher by a
sanctioned individual or entity, it must also be considered sanctioned. The rule is similar in
the EU, but the entity must be owned at a level higher than 50%. The ownership can be direct
or indirect, but the purpose of the rule is to identify legal entities through which the
sanctioned entity or individual could conduct business and try to evade sanctions.

CGSS Page 125
Version 1.531
The challenge is to establish who the owners or controllers are so that you can then determine
whether any of them could be sanctions targets, and if so, whether they meet the 50%
holdings rule. Whenever a number of different owners are involved in a corporate structure, it
can bea challenge to determine who the beneficial owners are and who has effective control
over the entities involved.

In this example, Person 5's ownership of Company A is hidden by a multi-layer corporate
structure that distances his own name from that of Company A.

Figure 13: Complex Corporate Ownership Schemes 2

100%
50% 50% 100% 100% 90%

O '

1 10% 40% 4 50% 10% wmf 50% 4

Cc
A

Another way to conceal an owner’s identity is to use legal entities incorporated or established
in jurisdictions where information on beneficial ownership is difficult to get. In some
jurisdictions, the company register is not publicly accessible. In others, the register doesn’t
include information about the beneficial owners of the companies listed on it. And in still other
cases, it is possible to find out this information only by making a registrar request, which may
not always be granted.

It’s also possible to conceal the identity of a corporation’s owners through bearer bonds or
shares. The records for these instruments don’t record the identity of the actual owner. In
theory, the owner of the legal entity is the party who physically holds the bearer share or bond
certificate. So the identity of the real owner is rarely, if ever, provided when a government or
institution requests sanctions due diligence about the structure’s owners.

CGSS Page 126
Version 1.531
Luckily, the use of bearer bonds and shares has been in rapid decline and is largely
discouraged for this reason. For example, since 2015, Swiss authorities have required that the
holders of bearer shares in a Swiss company establish the identity of the real owner. This
information must be kept ona register and must include the identity of all individuals owning
25% or more of the shares.

Dilution of Sanctioned Ownership

Complex ownership structures involving multiple entities in different jurisdictions can dilute
the sanctioned ownership so that it falls below thresholds that would prevent trade. This
dilution allows a sanctioned country or entity to avoid the restrictions the sanctions create. An
example of this is Iran’s investments in Bahrain-based banking entities, which in turn fund
Bahrain-based power companies. These banking entities and power companies can
legitimately trade in Europe, while the Iranian State cannot. A web of subsidiaries,
intermediaries, and authorized representatives ensure that—technically speaking—no
sanctions are violated. However, the result is that the sanctioned entity is able to obtain
resources and goods to which the sanctions seek to block access.

Proxies or “Front” Parties

The next tactic involves the use of proxies. This term refers to having someone else act as if
they were the actual owner or controller of a fund, property, or business. In some cases, even
when you are able to obtain corporate records, they will contain only the names of nominee
directors or shareholders. These people are not the actual directors or shareholders. Instead,
they are individuals appointed to act on behalf of these directors or shareholders. This
situation can happen in foundations, where the persons listed as the UBOs are actually legal
representatives and not the true owners. Although the use of nominee shareholders is also in
rapid decline, the use of nominee directors is still common.

Sanctioned targets sometimes use straw men or “front men.” This is essentially a non-
sanctioned person with a low public profile who acts for, or stands in the place of, a sanctions
target. The straw man does not act in any real sense as an owner or controller. Instead, he or
she carries out activities at the direction of the sanctions target, who is active in the
background. Often, a straw man will act as a consultant, commercial representative, or other
similar role for the target. Straw men often take steps to ensure that there is no evidence of
the sanctions target’s involvement with the legal entity. So there will generally not be any
formal written agreements appointing a straw man.

Some evaders use front companies to violate trade restrictions. Front companies are also used
in evasion tactics that are unrelated to trade. In these instances, the front company conceals
the identity of targets who are beneficial owners or controllers. Evaders often use this tactic in
combination with straw men or nominee directors.

CGSS Page 127
Version 1.531
Finally, there is the use of isolation companies. Similar to front companies, an isolation
company helps evaders avoid the appearance of involvement of either a sanctioned entity or
an entity that is trying to do business with a sanctions target. The main difference between a
front company and an isolation company is that evaders choose an isolation company either
for its past business activities or its lack of traceable connection to the entities involved in the
evasive activity.

In 2017, telecom giant ZTE agreed to pay a total fine of $892 million to several regulators for
violating US sanctions on Iran and North Korea. ZTE used several evasion tactics to export
goods from the United States to Iran. ZTE used third-party companies to conceal and facilitate
its business with the two sanctioned jurisdictions. These isolation companies were intended to
provide a pass-through or buffer and obscure ZTE’s shipment activity into, and with, Iran. The
companies had no previous commercial connection to ZTE.

The isolation companies removed all evidence of ZTE’s involvement with the export activity.
They removed ZTE’s logos and any references to ZTE from shipping documentation. The goal
was to make it look as though the isolation companies were the ones doing business with Iran.

In this case, outside parties established and owned the isolation companies. They weren't a
member of ZTE’s group of companies. However, ZTE arranged with the owners to provide the
companies with operating capital. In exchange, the outside parties gave day-to-day control of
the companies to ZTE. Asa result, the isolation companies appeared as though they, and not
ZTE, were doing business with sanctions targets.

Restructuring of Ownership Interests

Another evasion tactic is restructuring, which will be addressed in two respects—the
divestment or “sale” of ownership interests and the reorganization of existing ownership
interests.

DIVESTMENT OF OWNERSHIP INTERESTS

The term sham divestments refer to transactions in which sanctions targets sell assets or
equity to close associates or other affiliated persons. These can include friends, colleagues,
subordinates, business partners, and family members. Similar to using an isolation company,
the idea is that the sanctions target no longer appears to “own” the asset or shares ina
company. However, the target continues to influence or control the asset or the company’s
operations.

The following is an example:

CGSS Page 128
Version 1.531
Concealment of Identity 1

US sanctions targets

Company

© —_—

Owned by Roman Rotenberg

EU sanctions target (Son of Boris)
Arkady Rotenberg Boris Rotenberg
(Brother 2) (Brother 1)
Russia
Finland

es |

shares

reraversoy ZZ —-—_——

Billionaire brothers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg are alleged to be close friends of Russian
president Vladimir Putin. The United States named both brothers as sanctions targets in early
2014. The European Union also listed Boris as a sanctions target.

 

Several months after they were listed, Boris sold his 50% stake in a Finnish company called
Arena Events Oy to his son Roman. This sale of his interest in Arena Events was an attempt to
prevent the assets and activities of Arena from being restricted under the same sanctions that
applied to Boris. It was believed that Boris planned to continue to exercise full control over the
company despite this divestment.

OFAC AND THE 50 PERCENT RULE

OFAC specifies that entities are blocked if one or more blocked persons owns a total of 50% of
the entity—directly or indirectly. Any divestment transactions for such entities must take
place outside of US jurisdiction and must not involve US persons. However, entities that have
less than 50% ownership by blocked persons are not blocked, according to OFAC. It is
important to conduct due diligence to be certain that any alleged divestment actually
happened and was not a sham transaction.

What happens when the property of an entity blocked because of the 50 Percent Rule comes
within the United States or comes within the control of a US person? In that case, the property
is blocked until one of these events takes place:

e OFAC allows the unblocking, or
e OFAC takes the blocked person off the SDN list.

CGSS Page 129
Version 1.531
Even if the blocked person’s ownership of the entity later falls below 50%, the property
remains blocked. Why? OFAC considers the blocked person to have an interest in the blocked
property. Someone holding this type of property may ask for authorization from OFAC to
transfer or otherwise deal in the property.

Similarly, if the combined ownership of blocked persons in an entity falls below 50% because
of actions by the blocked persons, then that property remains blocked according to OFAC.
However, if the ownership by blocked persons falls below 50% because OFAC has removed
certain persons from the SDN list, then the entity is no longer blocked.

REORGANIZATION OF OWNERSHIP INTERESTS

Finally, there’s the reorganization of existing ownership interests. If the sanctions target
divests its ownership stake ina company so that its total or aggregate ownership is less than
50%, then the entities involved may no longer be subject to sanctions restrictions. This tactic
is designed to make it appear as if the sanctions target’s ownership falls below the 50%
threshold. Sanctions targets use different strategies to make it appear that they no longer own
or control legal entities to prevent government agencies from restricting their activities.

Here’s an example of reorganization of ownership interests. In 2014, shortly before being
listed as an SDN on OFAC’s Crimea sanctions list, Bank Rossiya decreased its indirect stake in
the SOGAZ insurance company from 51% to 48.5%. However, SOGAZ continued to be 12.5%
owned by Gennady

CGSS Page 130
Version 1.531
Figure 14: Concealment of Identity 2

Before March 2014 March -August 2014 After August 2014

<= =
TH TH

 

 

 

 

Bank Rossya Bank Rossya Bank Rossya
t 100% 4 100% + 100%
ABRos ABRos ABRos

 

Sogaz Realty

Kordeks

48.5%
oN aay hon ao Lon

 

Kordeks 51% 32.3%

we
Sogaz Sogaz Sogaz |

Sogaz Realty

Timchenko through an entity named Kordeks, also an OFAC SDN. Following the introduction
of the aggregate ownership rule by OFAC, Bank Rossiya’s subsidiary, ABRos, further reduced
its ownership to 32.3%. As a result, both Bank Rossiya and Timchenko, through the entity
Kordeks, owned, in total, less than 50% in SOGAZ.

Ownership structures such as this show how challenging it can be for an organization to stay
on top of its customer population, understand who it can and cannot do business with, and
ensure that it stays compliant with all relevant laws. In most jurisdictions, ownership changes
can be completed quickly by simply filing the updated information with the proper authority
or registry for a small fee. Sanctioned individuals intent on operating in the global financial
system without restriction can reduce or conceal their ownership long enough to satisfy
requirements and secure accounts or relationships with the banks they seek to deal with.
Then they revert to a controlling interest in the account-holding entities until the next review
of information takes place. Until ownership information is governed globally, and a financial
institution’s systems are capable of monitoring all changes, the ability to flag these entities is
only as accurate as the last full review and verification of their ownership information.

What are the steps to take before considering doing business with an entity that is partly

owned by a sanctioned individual or entity? Even ifthe ownership percentage is well below

CGSS Page 131
Version 1.531
the threshold, it makes sense to apply additional due diligence to the entity’s ownership
history. It is vital to ensure the sanctioned individual or entity is not in effective control
through a complex ownership scenario. An organization must make sure the entity didn’t alter
its ownership history before making contact with the organization.

Final Note

We've looked at a number of ways sanctioned entities and individuals seek to avoid
government sanctions, restrictions, and prohibitions. In some significant instances, some of
these evaders have been successful for a time—often with the aid of major financial
institutions and their employees. We’ve seen how important it is to have a robust sanctions
screening program, with controls that take into account the motivations of those involved. It is
vital that senior management appreciate the importance of sanctions compliance so that the
program can effectively operate within your business. We've also seen that it’s necessary to
regularly review, test, and update your sanctions screening program so it reflects the latest
information in your jurisdiction.

CGSS Page 132
Version 1.531
Sanctions Due Diligence

Perform Sanctions Due Diligence

 

Today’s world involves increasingly complex laws, regulations, and policies. Add to that the
variety of types and scopes of sanctions, and an organization should recognize the absolute
need for an effective sanctions due diligence process to mitigate risk.

Know your customer (KYC) / Customer due diligence (CDD) is a set of internal controls that
enable a financial institution to establish a customer’s identity, predict with relative certainty
the types of transactions in which the customer is likely to engage, and assess the extent to
which the customer exposes the institution to a range of risks (e.g., money laundering and
sanctions). Note that in Europe, the terms KYC and CDD are used interchangeably, while in the
US, there is a slight difference between KYC and CDD. Organizations also need to know their
customers through KYC to guard against fraud and to comply with the requirements of
relevant legislation and regulation. Effective KYC programs also help to protect banks’
reputation and the integrity of banking systems by reducing the likelihood of banks becoming
a vehicle for, or a victim of, financial crime. As such, these programs constitute an essential
part of sound risk management.

Sanctions due diligence (SDD) is related to KYC and focuses on the risks specific to sanctions,
as sanctions regulations are not part of AML regulations. SDD includes establishing the
identity of the customer and determining the customer’s beneficial ownership and controlling
influences. However, depending on the context, it may be more or less expansive than KYC. For
example, SDD may not include AML-related information, such as the name of the primary
regulator as identified in the Wolfsberg questionnaire or whether a person is a politically
exposed person, but it may include a full understanding of the end user and supply chain.
Importantly, it takes into account governance and risk assessment, which are described below.
SDD utilizes and builds upon the valuable KYC information an organization collects as part of
its existing AML program. SDD is also applied in the same way as AML KYC throughout the life
cycle ofa relationship.

In other words, SDD is applied:
e Atthe start ofa relationship (i.e., onboarding)

e Upon the introduction ofa new product

CGSS Page 133
Version 1.531
e Inresponse to trigger events during a relationship, such as a target match generated by a
screening tool

e During periodic reviews

e When a relationship comes to an end

Given the frequently changing nature of sanctions, it is imperative that institutions keep up-to-
date SDD data with which to effectively mitigate sanctions risks. Full sanctions are relatively
straightforward to implement. However, sanctions become more complicated with gradual
easing. For example, the gradual easing of European economic and financial sanctions
imposed on Iran requires that European businesses assess the extent to which they or one of
their counterparties might have some involvement in permitted activities. The same situation
applies to targeted sanctions against Russian entities and individuals, in which case the
specific nature of the transactions must be assessed in order to determine whether the
transactions are permitted.

In some cases, US individuals and entities are subject to primary US sanctions and are thus
prohibited from engaging in transactions and dealings with a country and its government.
However, case-by-case licensing applications are possible for certain transactions. Secondary
sanctions apply to non-US persons who are involved in transactions with individuals and
entities in other countries.

The continued restrictions on US persons requires that financial institutions conduct thorough
due diligence to ensure that the services and products they provide do not violate these
restrictions, especially where several different parties or entities may be involved.

Sometimes there is a conflict between laws, in which case the entity must decide which laws to
follow when they compete for compliance. This is particularly relevant in the case of Iran
following the United States “snap-back” in early 2019, at which point the EU’s Iran sanctions
regime significantly deviated from that of the United States. Ifa US nexus exists, the Office of
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) regulations apply.

Ongoing monitoring measures are necessary to ensure that transactions are screened in real
time (i.e., ex ante) and payments are checked to ensure that ongoing restrictions related to any
relevant sanctions regime are not being violated.

Governance

Sanctions due diligence is driven by sanctions regimes and governance. Sanctions regimes are
both far-reaching and very targeted, which can complicate the SDD measures that are
necessary to meet sanctions requirements. This situation often requires institutions to

CGSS Page 134
Version 1.531
conduct in-depth investigations in order to manage the risks. The greatest risk in relation to
sanctions breaches is the use of intermediaries and other means to hide the ultimate customer
or user ofa product. Thus, transactions in which there is a transfer of ownership and more
than one party involved can be used to disguise the true reason behind a transaction. Trade
finance transactions are well-suited to these types of activities.

Due to the targeted nature of the sanctions and the risks of links to terrorist financing, it is
important to have in place solid governance frameworks for business activities in or related to
sanctioned countries and terrorist financing networks. Organizations should therefore
develop appropriate risk assessment tools with which to identify high-risk customers and
then subsequently undertake enhanced due diligence (EDD) to identify the direct and, more
importantly, the indirect links to sanctioned entities and individuals. Finally, based on the
results ofa risk assessment, risk mitigation measures and monitoring procedures should be
implemented to manage and minimize sanctions risk exposure.

Within a financial institution, the governance structure that supports a sanctions compliance
program is generally comprised of two components: (1) the board of directors (or equivalent
oversight body), including senior management, and (2) the “three lines of defense.”

The board of directors is responsible for approving the sanctions compliance program and
providing oversight of the program. The board will often sign off on the organization’s
sanctions risk assessment. In addition, the board is responsible for establishing the “risk
appetite” of the business and ensuring that the program is sufficiently resourced based on the
results of the risk assessment.

There are three lines of defense within the governance structure of a sanctions compliance
program (): the business line, sanctions compliance, and internal audit.

The first line of defense is the business line, also referred to as the “front line.” The first-line
defense includes relationship managers and other customer-facing employees. These
individuals are closest to the customers and counterparties during the onboarding and
contracting phase of relationships. They are the first to identify unusual activity in relation toa
customer’s business or behavior. The first-line defense is responsible for ensuring that
adequate information is obtained so that effective screening of customers and their owners
and controllers can be performed. In general, the first-line defense owns and manages the
collection of SDD information.

 

°0 “Enhanced Due Diligence in Managing Sanctions Risks,” ACAMS Today, March 7, 2016.

CGSS Page 135
Version 1.531
Three Lines of Defense

Board of directors

    

 

 

 

ey th
Line of business Compliance function Intemal audit

Effective employee training is a key component ofa solid front-line defense. The institution
must establish processes for screening employees to ensure high ethical and professional
standards, and it must deliver appropriate training on SDD policies and procedures based on
roles and functions performed so employees are keenly aware of their responsibilities. To
facilitate this, employees should be trained as soon as possible after being hired, with
refresher training as appropriate.

The sanctions compliance function, as well as the larger compliance function, and the human
resources and technology departments comprise the second line of defense. In all cases, the
sanctions compliance officer (SCO) is responsible for ongoing monitoring for sanctions
compliance, including sample testing and a review of exception reports, to enable the
escalation of identified noncompliance or other issues to senior management and, where
appropriate, the board. The sanctions compliance officer should be the contact point for all
sanctions-related issues for internal and external authorities and should have the
responsibility for reporting suspicious transactions. To enable the successful oversight of the
sanctions compliance program, the sanctions compliance officer must have sufficient
independence from the business lines to prevent conflicts of interest and to facilitate unbiased
advice and counsel. The compliance officer should not be entrusted with the responsibilities of
data protection or internal audit.

In general, the second line exists to ensure that SDD procedures and processes applied by the
first line are designed properly, established firmly, and applied as intended. Individuals
supporting the second line of defense should review the effectiveness of controls used to
mitigate sanctions risks, provide information to the first line, and, depending on the business,

CGSS Page 136
Version 1.531
investigate possible noncompliance with sanctions restrictions. If necessary, they submit
reports to the relevant authorities.

Within the second-line defense function, there is typically a subject-matter expert who is also
a manager. This individual may or may not be the Money Laundering Reporting Officer
(MLRO).

Embedded within the various lines of defense, sanctions programs should have dual controls
in place. Dual control is a principle whereby at least two employees are required in order to
complete an internal control task. The purpose of dual control is to protect against internal
fraud and prevent internal control failure at a single point. In some circumstances, this is
referred to as “maker-checker” or “four-eyes.”

The dual-control process varies based on institution size; it can reside solely within the
second-line defense or involve the first line, including the operations department. The
escalation paths and related dual-control functions depend on the size and complexity of both
the institution and the business profile.

The third line of defense is internal audit (the same as the testing and auditing step, per the
OFAC guidance), which involves independent reviews of the controls applied by the first two
lines of defense. Individuals who conduct the internal audit should report to the audit
committee of the board of directors (or a similar oversight body) and independently evaluate
the risk management and controls of the bank through periodic assessments. Specific aspects
of the audit include assessment of the following: the adequacy of the bank’s controls to
mitigate the identified risks, the effectiveness of the staffs execution of the controls, the
effectiveness of the compliance oversight and quality controls, and the effectiveness of
training. The audit function relies on knowledgeable employees with sufficient audit expertise
and comprehensive training on sanctions risks, how they arise, and the types of controls used
to mitigate risks. Audits should be conducted ona risk-based frequency, and a bank-wide
audit should be conducted periodically. Audits need to be properly scoped to evaluate the
effectiveness of the program, including where external auditors are used. Auditors should
proactively follow up on their findings and recommendations.

Know Your Customer

Customers are the core of business—whether in the public or the private sector. Yet
customers also present a risk to an institution with regard to sanctions compliance. For this
reason, knowing and understanding the customer is critical in sanctions compliance programs,
including identifying and verifying a customer’s identity and understanding the nature and
purpose of the customer’s business. In fact, the more an institution knows about its customers,
the better it can mitigate the risk of noncompliance. Note that “customer” as used herein also
refers to related parties, which may include suppliers to a business, executive management,
and beneficial owners.

CGSS Page 137
Version 1.531
Comprehensive policies, procedures, and processes for all customers comprise a sound KYC
program that works to prevent financial crimes and ensure compliance with global sanctions.
In fact, KYC is Recommendation 10 in the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
Recommendations of February 2012 and updated in 2018. FATF recommends that institutions
incorporate the following measures into their KYC programs:

e Identifying the customer and verifying the customer’s identity using reliable independent
source documents, data, or information

e Identifying the beneficial owners and taking reasonable measures to verify the identity of
the beneficial owners

e Understanding and, as appropriate, obtaining information on the purpose and intended
nature of the business relationship

e Conducting ongoing due diligence on the business relationship and scrutinizing
transactions undertaken throughout the course of the relationship to ensure that the
transactions being conducted are consistent with the institution’s knowledge ofthe
customer, their business, their risk profile, and, where necessary, the source of their funds

Although not all elements of a complete KYC program are directly relevant to a sanctions
program (e.g., customer risk rating), a sanctions program should encompass the following
basic elements, tailored to the firm’s business profile:

e Knowing and verifying the identity of a customer and any counterparties
e Knowing and verifying the beneficial owners
e Understanding the nature and purpose of the customer’s account or transactions,
including:
e The underlying business activity of the customer, what goods and services it trades in,
and why it is seeking funding or other services
e Where the customer is located and, if different, its principal place of business
e Where the customer intends to send funds or receive funds from
e The source of funds and the source of wealth

For sanctions purposes, the scope of SDD can be more limited (although it is never
appropriate to neglect AML responsibilities) and depends on the business profile. Some of the
basic elements of SDD will be obvious, such as when the customer is a publicly traded
company on a well-regulated stock exchange that requires voluminous disclosures, or when
the customer is a small, local retail business within the community. The difficulty is in finding
the middle ground. The core element of SDD is an understanding of the sanctions exposure
that emanates from the customer and its business.

CGSS Page 138
Version 1.531
Contrasted with AML requirements, sanctions information can be focused, for example, when
considering geographic risk exposure. For AML purposes, understanding a customer’s
exposure to high-risk countries may be appropriate. However, for sanctions purposes, this
understanding may be narrowed to identifying a customer’s risk exposure to those sanctioned
countries, which represent a smaller list.

Because sanctions risks can also linger in complex supply chain structures, it is important to
determine how the customer’s supply chain can be exposed to sanctions risk, even indirectly,
in addition to understanding the geographic risk exposure. This fact highlights the importance
of also knowing third parties.

An effective SDD process is essential for mitigating risk. SDD includes establishing the
customer’s identity, beneficial ownership, controlling influences, and sanctions risk exposure.
That process begins with collecting key information on customers.

KEY INFORMATION TO COLLECT

As with AML programs, because customers present various degrees of risk, SDD programs
need to incorporate different levels of due diligence for collecting information on customers.
Knowledge about a customer will drive the determination of where a customer falls in that
risk spectrum, and a standard process will outline the specific SDD methods.

A customer can pose a sanctions compliance risk for an organization via its supply chain,
affiliates, counterparties, products and services, and even from the nature of its business.
Undertaking SDD at onboarding is critical to identify potential sanctions risks and to identify
customers who might later become sanctions targets.

Key information to collect about customers includes:

1. The customer: Who is the customer? If it is a legal entity, who owns and controls it, and
who are the beneficial owners and intermediate owners (i.e., those legal intermediary
owners that are not natural persons), if appropriate? What assets do they hold, directly or
indirectly?

2. The nature of the business: What goods/preducts and services do they use? What

activities do they engage in? Could the goods or services have a military purpose?

3. The jurisdiction or geographical connections: In what jurisdictions do the parties operate?
With which jurisdictions do they intend to interact (involving your institution as opposed
to its overall operations)?

MAINTAINING UP-TO-DATE INFORMATION

After the onboarding stage, it is extremely important to maintain up-to-date SDD about the
customer, its controllers and beneficial owners, and any assets held, directly or indirectly. Up-
to-date SDD will help in the efficient and effective identification of new and existing customers

CGSS Page 139
Version 1.531
named as sanctions targets and their assets. Industry practices include having periodic
reviews and event-trigger reviews on the customer to determine whether the information
collected and verified at onboarding remains relevant to the current information and the
transactional activity observed.

Know the Ultimate Beneficial Owner

In addition to knowing the customer, an essential component of sanctions due diligence is
complete knowledge about legal entities and their ownership as part of a larger corporate
structure—that is, to know any beneficial owners of the customer. Financial institutions must
look beyond named account holders to the beneficiaries of transactions and the beneficial
owners of the entities involved.

The concept of beneficial ownership, also referred to as ultimate beneficial ownership (UBO),
is distinguished from legal or intermediary ownership. According to FATF and the US Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), beneficial owner refers to the natural person(s) who
ultimately owns or controls a customer and/or the natural person on whose behalf a
transaction is being conducted. It also includes natural person(s) who exercise effective
control over a legal person or arrangement. The phrases “ultimately owns or controls” and
“ultimate effective control” refer to situations in which ownership or control is exercised
through a chain of ownership or by means of control other than direct control. This definition
should also apply to the beneficial owner ofa beneficiary under a life or other investment-
linked insurance policy.

The term “beneficial ownership,” when used to refer to the beneficial ownership of an account,
is conventionally understood to equate to ultimate control over funds in such account,
whether through ownership or other means. “Control” in this sense is distinguished from mere
signature authority or legal title; it reflects the recognition that a person in whose name an
account is opened with a bank is not necessarily the person who ultimately controls such
funds. This distinction is important because the focus of AML efforts needs to be on the person
who has this ultimate level of control.?!

 

°1 The Wolfsberg Group. The Wolfsberg AML Principles: Frequently Asked Questions with Regard to
Beneficial Ownership in the Context of Private Banking.

CGSS Page 140
Version 1.531
Under the EU’s control prong, the EU sets out criteria to determine when a person or entity is
controlled by another person. The criteria include, among other things:

e “Having the right or exercising the power to appoint or remove a majority of the members
of the administrative, management, or supervisory body of such legal person or entity

e Having appointed solely as a result of the exercise of one’s voting rights a majority ofthe
members of the administrative, management, or supervisory bodies of such legal person
or entity who have held office during the present and previous financial year

e Controlling alone, pursuant to an agreement with other shareholders in or members ofa
legal person or entity, a majority of shareholders’ or members’ voting rights in that legal
person or entity”

e Having the power to exercise a dominant influence pursuant to an agreement”

Perpetrators of financial crimes can use front companies, shell companies, trusts, and other
company structures to hide beneficial ownerships and links to known criminals, as well as
disguise the ultimate beneficial ownership of an asset.

DETERMINE BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP

The concept of “ownership” has evolved over time. Many businesses are so complex that it can
be challenging to determine who “owns” or controls them. However, regulators across the
world have begun instituting measures requiring financial institutions and other covered
institutions to collect and verify beneficial ownership, making this task more feasible.
Jurisdictions have taken two primary approaches to this task. The first, as utilized by the UK
and Australia, is the maintenance ofa centralized repository at the state level in which
beneficial ownership is entered. However, these registries can become outdated and therefore
cannot be relied upon completely. Financial institutions still are obligated to ensure or
independently verify that the correct beneficial ownership is collected. The second approach,
as recently exemplified in the United States, is to require financial institutions to
independently collect and verify beneficial ownership information on their own.

Performing Beneficial Ownership Due Diligence

Provisions requiring the disclosure of beneficial ownership information may include a reliance
provision on the information provided by the customer; however, reliance should in all cases
be reasonable. Moreover, financial institutions must establish clear requirements for how this
information will be used within their compliance programs, such as subjecting these

 

°2 Council of the European Union, Update of the EU Best Practices for the Effective Implementation of
Restrictive Measures, Brussels, June 24, 2015.

CGSS Page 141
Version 1.531
customers to ongoing screening and factoring the beneficial owners’ geographic location into
the sanctions risk assessment.

Firms also should trust and verify the identity of beneficial owners using reliable documents,
such as government-issued passports. Additional name screening using keyword searches in
search engines such as Google also can provide useful information that a third-party vendor
automated screening tool (AST) may not have identified, particularly when the beneficial
owners are located in developing countries. For example, searching for beneficial owners
using a Chinese search string in the search engine Baidu is a good practice for discovering
beneficial owners found in China.

If the risk exposure is high, it may be appropriate to undertake a more in-depth customer due
diligence and sanctions due diligence investigation, particularly when details pertaining to
beneficial ownership remain unclear. In addition, escalate the case to senior management or
the risk committee to allow for a risk-based and well-documented decision. Depending on the
regions in which the firm is active, the available databases may not include all of the relevant
information, and these sources can become outdated. Further complicating matters, many
countries do not disclose UBO information. In Russia, for example, access to corporate
information has become more restrictive, and this is only one example of many countries for
which ultimate beneficial ownership information is not available. This is true for many high-
risk countries in which an organization can be exposed to sanctions risks. If risk exposure is
high, undertaking an in-depth investigation using in-country sources and engaging local
country and regional experts may be the only way to determine the UBO.

Managing Operational Challenges

Several operational challenges can be encountered when attempting to identify beneficial
owners, including:

e Limited or lack of information and transparency

e Lack of familiarity concerning beneficial ownership for some overseas structures

e Calculation of aggregate ownership/information about owners (i.e., is there sufficient
information to determine that a sanctions target actually owns a corporate entity?)

e Identification of associated persons

eTrust and veracity of information: Is the information provided by or about a customer
reliable? Can the information provided be trusted as accurate and truthful? This can prove
to bea challenge with customers who are new to an organization.

e Customer/intermediary cooperation: Some customers or their advisors are reluctant to
provide KYC/CDD, claiming that the information is confidential or illegal because ofa
country’s data privacy laws. Legal advisors can argue that the information is subject to
legal privilege and refuse to provide information about, for example, a corporate structure

CGSS Page 142
Version 1.531
or even a customer’s tax residency. Although there may be legitimate privacy concerns, an
organization should be aware of the laws in its jurisdiction.

e High-volume business (e.g., retail)

e Data silos: Ina larger organization, a customer may have accessed services from different
lines of business, and each one of them holds different SDD for the customer. When this
information is stored on different systems, or in different jurisdictions, it can be difficult to
form a complete picture of the customer’s overall sanctions risks profile.

Depending on your firm’s risk appetite, sanctions risk compliance can be very simple or very
complex, requiring procedures and processes to abide by strict rules. Similar to AML
compliance, sanctions compliance is also risk-based, but with the additional factor that it is
generally strict liability; that is, regardless of whether a firm intended to violate sanctions or
knew it was violating sanctions, it can be held liable. Additionally, ifthe program is not
sufficiently designed, a firm can be exposed to heightened risk exposure and liability. Beyond
following established policies and procedures, remaining diligent, and escalating an issue
when in doubt, institutions may be advised to undertake more in-depth due diligence
investigations in order to mitigate risk exposure adequately. It is important that sanctions
compliance programs be designed to be flexible and easily adapted to meet changes in the
regulatory landscape ina timely manner.

CASE EXAMPLE: BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP AND RISK APPETITE

CASE SUMMARY

AUS compliance officer working for a foreign branch in the United States had been
recommended a customer from his head office in a high-risk jurisdiction that was said to be
potentially lucrative for the bank. The potential customer was owned 17% by a specially
designated national (SDN). This was the first customer at the branch that had ownership
exposure to a sanctioned target; previously it was understood that the branch did not engage
with these types of customers.

Prior to onboarding the customer, the compliance officer met with the branch’s senior
management to discuss establishing a risk appetite and controls to mitigate the additional risk
from this new type of customer. Next, the branch took its recommendations to the board of
directors for its approval. The firm decided to take additional measures by updating its
policies and procedures to address the new type of risk, including requiring more frequent
updates from the customer of its ownership structure and closer scrutiny of trade documents
prior to approving transactions. It also established risk appetite limits on the number of
customers the branch would accept with SDN ownership and the highest level of SDN
ownership the branch would accept, e.g., 20% aggregate ownership. Finally, the firm required
additional reporting within the compliance committee and to the board on the customer’s
volume of transactions.

CGSS Page 143
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Aninstitution should establish written controls prior to engaging in a new type of business
or with a new type of customer risk.

> Itis important to get approval from the board of directors (or equivalent) when engaging
in business that exceeds the firm’s risk appetite.

> The board of directors should be involved in establishing risk appetite limits and reporting
requirements concerning the firm’s high-risk business activity.

> Once beneficial ownership has been established, the institution must continually monitor
the customer to be alerted to any changes to ownership and ensure that owners are
screened against relevant sanctions lists in a timely manner.

Documenting/Reporting Beneficial Ownership Information

Regulations concerning the documenting and reporting of beneficial ownership information
vary. In the EU, subject to data protection rules, information concerning beneficial ownership
must be held in central registers in each Member State and made available to competent
authorities, financial intelligence units (FIUs), obliged entities, and any person with legitimate
interest.

In most jurisdictions, corporate structure is distinguished between public companies and
private limited companies. For public companies, shares are freely available and traded
publicly, there is usually no limit to the number of shareholders, information on its ownership
and its board of directors is publicly available, and the companies are subject to significant
regulation. On the other hand, private limited companies are not publicly traded, they are
restrictive in the number of shares, they have ownership that can be by one or many, and they
are subject to minimal regulatory oversight.

CALCULATE BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP

Beneficial ownership comes into play with regard to SDD when a sanctions restriction has
been imposed on an owner or controller of one of an institution’s customers. It may also apply
to a counterpart/non-customer/the person on the other side of the transaction, although that
is much more difficult to account for. The US’s and EU’s sanctions regimes have different
requirements regarding the application of sanctions restrictions to legal entities with owners
that are sanctions targets.

OFAC 50 Percent Rule

Determining ownership for SDD is different than for anti-money laundering (AML)
requirements, most of which identify a beneficial owner as one that directly or indirectly owns
more than 25% ofa legal entity. In contrast, for SDD, the Office of Foreign Assets Control

CGSS Page 144
Version 1.531
(OFAC) in the United States applies the 50 Percent Rule to legal entity ownership, whether
direct or indirect. That is, ifa sanctions target owns 50% or more of another legal entity, the
legal entity is also subject to the sanctions restrictions—even if it is not itself named as a
sanctions target. The OFAC 50 Percent Rule also requires that sanctions restrictions be applied
if exactly 50% or more of the shares, or their equivalent, are owned by an individual or a legal
entity that is a sanctions target.

This rule does not simply apply to the ownership of a single company; it also requires that
beneficial ownership be based on the total, or aggregate, amount of shares that sanctions
targets own across a corporate structure. This rule prevents sanctions targets from creating
complex corporate structures and spreading their ownership across the holding structure so
they don’t hold more than 50% of any one corporate entity. By doing this, the sanctions target
is able to circumvent sanctions and maintain access to its assets held in various entities.

Financial institutions must identify the connections among all of
the owners and then calculate the percentages of beneficial Figure 15: Illustration of
ownership. As shown in the example in Figure 15, ifa person Aggregate Rule—

who is a sanctions target owns 100% of one company (Company Cascading

A), and that company owns 50% ofa second company (Company
B), then Company B is also subject to sanctions. In effect, the
sanctions target owns 50% of the second company—even if the
target’s name is not apparent in Company B’s website or board
of directors, and even if Company B does not appear on the SDN
list.

For this reason, it is never enough to simply screen the name ofa
legal entity that is your customer. Sanctions due diligence
requires verifying whether that customer is part of a larger
structure in which a sanctioned target may, in aggregate, directly
or indirectly hold 50% or more ownership.

      

{Notan SDN)

The aggregate ownership of a corporate structure can be affected by the OFAC rule. Ifa
company that is an SDN target holds shares in other companies that together are equal to or
more than 50%, the other companies are also subject to same sanctions restrictions. This
aggregate rule cascades down: If a company that is an SDN (Company A) owns 50% or more in
another company (Company B), which holds 50% or more of another company (Company C),
Company C also is subject to the same sanctions restrictions that apply to Company A.

CGSS Page 145
Version 1.531
EU More than 50 Percent Rule

In the example shown in Figure 16, 56% of
Figure 16: SDD—Key Risk Areas— Company D is owned by Companies A and E,
Customers which are both 100% owned by Basil Smith,
who is an SDN. Even though Companies A and
E are not SDNs, the OFAC aggregate rule

Basil Smith applies, and they would be subject to sanctions
restrictions. When performing SDD, it is
SDN important to obtain information about the

owners of all corporate entities ina structure
and the percentage of those holdings.

 

There are three significant differences
between OFAC and the EU’s European Best
Practice Guidance concerning SDD and
beneficial ownership:

1. The EU’s rule applies when a sanctions
27% 29% target owns more than 50% ofa legal entity.

2. The EU has not yet implemented the
aggregate rule.

3. The EU requires that assets be frozen when
a sanctions target “controls” or exercises
influence over an entity.

Unlike the United States, the EU does not apply the aggregate rule to ownership interests
separately maintained by sanctions targets under the

50 Percent Rule. However, because the EU AML Directives have required that financial
institutions collect KYC for companies holding 25% or more ownership ofan entity,
businesses often apply this percentage as part of their sanctions compliance program.

The EU rule clearly applies to a broad range of structures, including groups of entities as well
as parties that may exert influence or control over an entity, as in proprietary rights or
majority interest. For example, the EU rule would identify a situation in which an individual
asks other individuals to hold his/her shares through a nominee arrangement in an attempt to
hide his/her identity when he/she is in fact making significant decisions about how the entity

CGSS Page 146
Version 1.531
operates or benefits financially from its activities (e.g., by acting in key roles). For example, in
the implementation of the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) sanctions in 2014, Russian
targets divested interest in entities prior to implementation of the US sanctions. Although this
action may have circumvented the US sanctions, under the EU rule regarding control, it may
not have been sufficient, as divestment does not necessarily divest control.

The EU guidance provides a number of examples of how an individual or entity can exert
control. In the example shown in , the entity comprises two different structures—companies
and an underlying trust. The initial information received identified three individuals: Mr. X,
Nominee Shareholder Y, and Nominee Shareholder Z. Due diligence found that Mr. X, who is
named on the EU Consolidated Sanctions List, is also the sole director for Companies B and C.
Under the EU guidance, as the sole director, Mr. X would be considered to be the controller of
Companies B and C, which would therefore also be subject to the sanctions restrictions that
have been imposed on Mr. X. The trust also may be subject to these restrictions because, as
protector, Mr. X may exercise influence over the administration of the trust’s assets, including
whether to replace the trustee.

When performing SDD, it’s important to obtain information about individuals who might
control a corporate entity and documentation that describes the nature of that control.

Figure 17: Beneficial Ownership: EU

100% g

oO Nominee

Shareholder Y

  

50%

apne 100%
é e— 8

Mr. X - Protector Nominee

Shareholder Z

CGSS Page 147
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE: BARCLAYS BANK PLC, 2016

CASE SUMMARY

In February of 2016, OFAC reached a $2,485,890 settlement with Barclays Bank Plc (Barclays).
Barclays agreed to settle its potential civil liability for 159 apparent violations of the
Zimbabwe Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. Part 541. From July 2008 to September 2013,
Barclays processed 159 transactions totaling $3,375,617 to or through financial institutions
located in the United States—including Barclays’s New York branch—for or on behalf of
corporate customers of Barclays Bank of Zimbabwe Limited (BBZ) that were owned 50% or
more, directly or indirectly, by an SDN (The Industrial Development Corporation of
Zimbabwe).

OFAC found that the bank was not able to screen beneficial owner information for its
corporate customers in order to identify the presence of SDNs. It also found that, for some
customers, the bank did not even know their beneficial owners were SDNs. The case came
about because several transactions from Barclays Bank had been blocked by US financial
institutions.%.

The following is a list of root causes of the noncompliance:

e Initially, constraints imposed by the local Zimbabwean authorities prevented Barclays
from implementing measures for complying with economic sanctions, including sanctions
screening, in Zimbabwe.

e Barclays used a defective CDD system that was technically incapable of including
beneficial ownership information in an electronic format; it was held only in paper form.
Therefore, beneficial ownership information was not included in the automated screening.

e For some customers, the bank did not obtain beneficial ownership information at all
because its AML KYC procedures were difficult for staff members to follow.

e When beneficial information was identified, and the system was remediated, correct
beneficial ownership information was not added to the electronic system quickly enough
to prevent further violations.

 

93 “Settlement Agreement between the US Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control
and Barclays Bank Plc,” US Department of the
Treasury, February 8, 2016.

°4US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for February 8, 2016.

CGSS Page 148
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Itis critically important to obtain, hold, and update sufficient information about beneficial
ownership in compliance with the 50 Percent Rule.

> Ifrisk exposure is high and any uncertainty regarding the ownership structure exists due
to a lack of reliable and up-to-date information, and in particular if the UBO cannot be fully
identified, an organization must undertake a more in-depth due diligence investigation by
using internal sources and/or external specialized investigators.

> This enforcement action highlights the importance for institutions with operations in
countries with a significant presence of persons (individuals and entities) on the SDN list
to take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with US economic sanctions laws
when processing transactions on behalf of their customers to, through, or within the
United States.

> Itis important to assess what technology solutions an organization might be able to
onboard to ensure that its sanctions compliance program can effectively manage sanctions
risks.

> Anorganization must recognize that it can also be exposed to other sanctions regimes,
such as the EU’s, which may have other thresholds differing from the 50 Percent Rule.

Know the Customer’s Nature of Business, Products
and Services, and Jurisdiction/Geography

The nature of a customer’s business, the goods and services it provides, and the jurisdictions
in which it conducts that business are key risk areas. Understanding these aspects of their
business is an important part of SDD and compliance with sanctions requirements.

NATURE OF BUSINESS AND PRODUCTS AND SERVICES

Although information about a customer’s nature of business, products, and services is
collected as part of the KYC process to assess AML risks, the way in which it is assessed for
sanctions risks is slightly different from that for AML KYC.

Sometimes, this risk area receives a “light touch” or quick investigation, perhaps because
employees conclude that a business that is identified as low risk under AML requirements is
also low risk from the sanctions perspective. As a result, some businesses only rely on details
provided via a customer’s website or the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes on
company registries to confirm the nature of their business. However, it’s vitally important to
resist making this assumption. The nature of a customer’s business can potentially bring with
ita number of potential sanctions risks.

CGSS Page 149
Version 1.531
A good example is a case involving the PanAmerican Seed Company. In 2016, OFAC fined the
PanAmerican Seed Company $12 million for violating the US sanctions against Iran. The US-
based business, which exported flower seeds, was found guilty of indirectly exporting flower
seeds to two Iranian distributors. PanAmerican Seed shipped the seeds to consignees who
were based in countries located in Europe or the Middle East. Those customers then arranged
for the re-exportation of the seeds to Iran.

Investigators learned that managers at PanAmerican knew about the Iran sanctions and the
need to obtain a license in order to export the seeds, but they did not apply to OFAC for
authorization. For AML purposes, the nature of this business would not be considered high
risk; however, this example shows that the same cannot be assumed for sanctions risks.

Recall that sanctions can prohibit or restrict activities, including trade in certain goods and
services. An analysis of the customer’s nature of business can be a good starting point from
which to determine whether further information is required to assess the customer’s level of
sanctions risk. This information is also useful in detecting possible evasion attempts.

Other considerations about the nature of a customer’s business that are specifically relevant to
sanctions risk include:

e Activity of subsidiaries or affiliated third parties

- Relationship/commercial connection to a sanctioned target through payments, linked
accounts, or other names

e Parties forming part of the supply chain

e Duration of current business activities

These factors may be detected at onboarding as part of SDD and during the relationship by
ongoing monitoring or screening controls. If, for example, a screening identifies that one of the
owners has a possible connection to a sanctions target, it would be necessary to look into any
relationships (through names, payments, linked accounts, etc.) that the customer might have.

Customers whose businesses involve trade-related activities warrant close attention in regard
to the nature of business and products and services. Sometimes it is assumed that trade
activity involving goods from a low-risk jurisdiction translates to a low sanctions risk. The
problem is that goods are often transshipped—i.e., the cargo is transferred from one form of
transport to another via another country before arriving at its final destination. The
intermediate jurisdiction can have an entirely different sanctions risk profile. So, a customer
who buys oils from India for shipment to the United Arab Emirates may believe their supplier
is ina low-risk jurisdiction. However, when the goods are shipped, they can pass through
sanctioned jurisdictions, elevating the sanctions risks of that customer.

Certain industries, by their nature, are more frequently subject to sanctions than others and
therefore merit immediate consideration for enhanced sanctions due diligence. Examples
include customers in the oil, gas, and finance industries. Industries that involve multiple

CGSS Page 150
Version 1.531
jurisdictions also pose a higher risk, such as insurance services and products, travel agencies,
tourism businesses, luxury goods, and others.

In these cases, consider asking questions such as:
e Are insurance products sold that cover restricted or prohibited goods?
e Are insurance products sold that cover activities undertaken in a sanctioned jurisdiction?

e Ifaninsurable event happened there, would proceeds need to be paid into that
jurisdiction?

e Are there beneficiaries, known or unknown, that could have latent SDN risk? If so, are they
being monitored?

e Is the level of due diligence sufficient to mitigate the risk of the beneficiary?

e Is the company internationally active?

As part of SDD, institutions must find out whether their customers that are involved in
exporting or importing have the necessary licenses, what the scope of these licenses is, and
whether notifications or authorization requirements must be satisfied.

JURISDICTION/GEOGRAPHY

Another key risk area related to customers is jurisdiction or geography. It’s important to

ro tt

understand a customer’s “geographic footprint.” This term is used to describe information
about individuals such as:

e Nationalities (current and former)

e Place of birth

e Place of residence (current and former)
e Place of employment

e Tax residency

e Occupation/travel for work (i.e., does the customer travel regularly to a country that is
subject to comprehensive sanctions, and if so, how is the travel funded?)

In regard to entities, knowing the customer’s jurisdiction/geography means determining
information such as:

e Location of business operations
e Location of customers, suppliers, affiliates, and related third parties
e Nationality and residence of ultimate beneficial owners

e Tax residency of ultimate beneficial owners

CGSS Page 151
Version 1.531
e Whether the customer sends or receives funds directly or indirectly to/from a country that
is subject to comprehensive sanctions

e Whether the customer derives services or economic value from a country that is subject to
comprehensive sanctions

It is important to view the customer in the regional context and assess whether the entity
arises from a country that borders any sanctioned jurisdiction or is known to be on the main
transit route from a sanctioned jurisdiction. Country risk exposure can thus often be indirect
and not directly linked to the customer’s country of location.

COMMON ERRORS AND ASSUMPTIONS

Within this risk area, there are some common errors and assumptions about SDD. One
concerns pass-through sanctions risk—the incorrect assumption that sanctions risks
associated with a customer’s affiliates or subsidiaries are simply a problem for the customer
to assess and manage. Regulators in the United Kingdom and the United States require all
parties within a transaction chain to check for possible sanctions risks. It is important for
financial institutions to ask for and review information about a customer’s affiliates and
subsidiaries.

CASE EXAMPLE: e.L.f. BEAUTY, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

In 2019, elf. Beauty agreed to pay nearly $1 million to settle liabilities stemming from
violations of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations. The company had failed to undertake
adequate due diligence on its suppliers and to understand its supply chain in detail. Througha
self-audit, e.l.f Beauty realized that, between 2012 and 2017, it had imported 156 shipments
of false eyelash kits valued at $4.43 million from two Chinese suppliers that sourced materials
from North Korea.

Because e.|.f. self-disclosed the violations, cooperated with OFAC, and adopted an enhanced
compliance program, the penalties were reduced. OFAC also stated that no one at el.f. knew
about the North Korean content, and the fake eyelash kits were nota significant part of the
company’s business. ?5. %. 97

 

95 “Elf Beauty pays nearly $1 million for violating North Korean sanctions—with false eyelashes,” CNBC,
January 31, 2019.

96 “Fake eyelash company fined $1m over North Korean imports,” The Guardian, February 1, 2019.

°7 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for January 31, 2019.

CGSS Page 152
Version 1.531
KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Anorganization should undertake an adequate risk assessment of a customer’s geographic
risk exposure.

> Itis important to identify third parties in the customer’s supply chain and undertake
enhanced SDD on those parties that pose a higher risk exposure due to geographic location
and other risk factors, such as complex supply chains and other issues linked to lack of
transparency.

> Organizations should undertake regular audits of sanctions risk exposure, even for those
parts of the business that are not main revenue drivers.

METHODS AND TOOLS

Comprehensive SDD methods and tools have been developed to gather the necessary
information from customers and third parties in order to identify and assess possible
sanctions risks connected to them. These include customer questionnaires, databases and
other information sources, relationship managers and frontline staff, and the customer.

Based on the level of risk involved, certain information should be verified, such as the identity
of the individual opening the account. For information verification, it is important that the
source referenced is reliable, current, and independent.

The SDD research model follows that of the KYC research model and involves four steps:
assess, explore, organize, and present.

e Assess: “What do we need to know?” Determine what information the firm already knows,
what information is missing, and how to most effectively collect that information.

e Explore: “Where can we find the answers?” This step involves executing the plan created
to collect the necessary information. It includes expanding the firm’s research toolkit and
effectively using time and effort.

e Organize: “How do we make customer information meaningful?” Organize and structure
the information collected ina meaningful way according to the firm’s risk-based approach.

e Present: “How do we present customer information in a manner to fulfill its purpose, i.e.,
aid in the detection of suspicious activity?” Present the information collected ina
meaningful way according to the firm’s risk-based approach.

Customer Questionnaire

Using a risk-based approach, most financial institutions use a customer questionnaire to
collect information about potential sanctions risks from customers and third parties. The
customer is responsible for completing it at the beginning of the relationship and supplying

CGSS Page 153
Version 1.531
supporting information. An organization should then supplement the questionnaire with
additional, verified information.

Given the amount of information that must be collected, many financial institutions have
moved their questionnaires online with forms designed to be responsive to the answers
provided by the customer. For example, if the customer answers “yes” to a question, there are
following questions or requests for further information. These forms force field validation, so
that the information collected is in a consistent format and all required fields are completed.
Application program interfaces (APIs) are often embedded into these applications to conduct
watchlist screening in near real-time and prompt additional questions.

It’s important to remember that questionnaires and forms that use decision logic—whether
paper or electronic—do not replace good human judgment. If any doubts remain, or it is
apparent at this stage that the customer already bears a heightened risk, it is important to
undertake independent research. If information is lacking, an organization should engage
expert advisors to undertake an in-depth due diligence investigation.

Databases and Other Information Sources

When a financial institution determines that a customer may present an elevated sanctions
risk, it is necessary to collect further information. In some parts of the world, such research is
greatly facilitated by the use of online tools.

Although many firms use third-party software to assist with the due diligence process, many
of these programs lack all of the necessary information. Open-source programs can be useful
to supplement SDD. Examples of open-source programs include:

e Google
e Archive.org—a nonprofit library of internet sites and other digital, historic media

e The Investigative Project on Terrorism—a list of groups and individuals who might be on
watchlists

e Financial Regulators Gateway—provides access to multiple regulatory websites and laws

e Moneylaundering.com—ACAMS’s newsletter

Expert investigators and providers of in-depth due diligence reports can clarify allegations
that have been retrieved from third-party databases and open source information, and
provide support in the form of in-depth insights into the transparency of ownership structures
and other elements that can affect the sanctions risk rating of a customer.

CGSS Page 154
Version 1.531
Relationship Managers and Frontline Staff

Relationship managers and other customer-facing staff will be best placed to conduct
customer outreach and communicate the findings to the compliance function. These
individuals are closest to customers and counterparties during onboarding.

Based on sanctions risk indicators communicated by the sanctions compliance officer (SCO),
the first line of defense should detect any sanctions-relevant issues and report them to the
SCO. In addition, they should notify the second line of defense of any changes to sanctions
risks that are identified throughout the business relationship when the customer expands the
products and services it offers. The first line should also assist the SCO in responding promptly
to any requests for information (RFI), maintain an awareness of sanctions, and understand
sanctions risks by participating in sanctions-related training.

Know Your High-Risk Lines of Business

Sanctions customer due diligence can vary based on the type of business line, product, and
service offering. Specific types of businesses that warrant special mention are retail banking,
wealth management and private banking, commercial and investment banking, trade-related
activity, correspondent banking, luxury goods, and insurance, among other industries.

RETAIL BANKING

The information necessary to assess sanctions risk in retail banking is relatively
straightforward. In terms of customer, the financial institution will request the general
information described above, including the identification requirements for individuals and
legal entities that will allow the institution to screen the customer’s data against sanctions
lists.

For the nature of business, it is helpful to identify any activity considered inconsistent with the
expected account activity. Review the occupation or business activity of the customer, the
products and services they offer, and the services they are seeking as a customer. For example,
a customer who wants to opena single checking/current account exclusively for domestic
transactions poses less risk than a customer who makes regular use of international electronic
funds transfers. The counterparties with whom a customer plans to do business would also be
relevant.

For jurisdiction/geography, consider the following factors as part of the effort to fully
understand this risk area:

e Tax residence
e Employment

e Family connections

CGSS Page 155
Version 1.531
e Location of other accounts
e Location of property/assets
e Other business interests

e Travel

Diplomats and international students, for example, would have a broader geographic risk
exposure than a municipal clerk, due to the nature of their occupations. The more connections
an individual has to a sanctioned country, the greater the risk that the individual could be
conducting transactions and activities that are sanctioned. Never assume that sanctions risks
are low just because the line of business is considered to be low risk.

CASE EXAMPLE: LIBYA

CASE SUMMARY

Some years ago, the United Nations enacted sanctions against certain leaders of Libya,
including Muammar Gaddafi. His son, Saadi Gaddafi, was also listed as a sanctions target.
Following the adoption of the sanctions, it was discovered that Saadi had opened retail bank
accounts in Canada and had purchased an apartment in Toronto.

To avoid detection, Saadi had given the bank and the party who arranged the purchase of his
apartment a different name from the one by which he was identified in the sanctions listing.

He changed the spelling of his last name by using the letter “K” to Kaddafi instead of the letter
“G98, 99

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> For customer risk, the bank should have asked for proof of name, date of birth, or
nationality. If the bank had had an automatic screening tool, its partial matching feature
could have detected a similarity in name to Saadi, the sanctions target.

> For the nature of business, the bank could have asked why he wanted to buy a property in
Canada. For example, the bank could have asked if he had business there, what he was
going to use the bank account for, and what was the source of the funds being transferred
to open the account. How did Saadi come by the money to buy the apartment? What was
his known occupation and source of wealth?

 

98 “Ts this house the key to seizing Gaddafi assets in the UK?” BBC News, December 16, 2011.
°° “The Gaddafi clan: Where are they now?” BBC News, October 20, 2012.

CGSS Page 156
Version 1.531
For jurisdiction/geography, the facts that Saadi was opening an account in Canada (where he
had no residence), that he was not a Canadian resident, and that he last resided in Libya would
likely have raised some sanctions risk red flags.

WEALTH MANAGEMENT AND PRIVATE BANKING

Wealth management and private banking can present different sanctions due diligence
challenges from retail banking. As shown in Figure 18, known sanctions risks in these lines of

business include:

Use of legal entities and complex structures; for example, for estate planning
Maintenance of wealth and assets in numerous jurisdictions

The involvement of intermediaries or advisors who might act on behalf of and on the
instructions of the customer

Investments or assets potentially connected to sanctioned targets
Culture of secrecy and anonymity

Wealth derived from complex business activities and ventures that may be difficult to
verify as “clean,” including from government contracts and foreign investments

Figure 18: SDD—Wealth Management/Private Banking Known Sanctions Risks

Powerful clients, PEPs

User of legal entities for estate planning ay We Private investment companies / intermediaries

=—_—_
Wealth in numerous m mw Investments or essois potentially
, — connected to sanctioned targets

jurisdictions " "
Private banking

® ~~

CGSS Page 157
Version 1.531
There are several key sanctions risk areas in these lines of business. Customers are likely to
use or involve complex ownership structures; therefore, the main risk is the level of
complexity. It is difficult to identify the owners and controllers. In these cases it is necessary to
obtain sufficient information about the structures to ensure the customer does not havea
beneficial owner who is a sanctions target and determine that none of the entities involved are
captured by either the EU or US beneficial ownership rules.

Customers in wealth management and private banking are more likely to have connections
and associations with individuals worldwide, some of whom can be or could later become
sanctions targets. Ensure that relationships with external parties are understood and the
identity ofall parties is disclosed.

With regard to nature of business, the wealth management and private banking business lines
can often involve the purchase and trading of investments. Check that the products and
investments involved are not restricted under Russian sectoral or Venezuelan sanctions. Often
businesses use intermediaries to manage the financial institution on their behalf, including
lawyers, investment advisors, family office managers, and accountants. Although some
intermediaries are trustworthy and have good intentions, others can conceal the identity of
the customer for whom they act. For this reason, financial institutions must seek complete
information about their identity, who they represent, what authority they have, etc. The
intermediaries should be screened as well.

To assess the jurisdiction/geography factor, examine the complexity of structures used, the

established assets, the location of associates, and the origin of funds. Investigate from where
the funds were generated and the nature of the business activities involved. As an example,

wealth derived from oil from a country where sanctions are in place could indicate possible

circumvention. Determine whether any travel accounts are held in other countries.

In wealth management and private banking, owners and controllers often do not hold assets in
their name. This arrangement can be made to address legitimate privacy concerns, but it can
also be made to hide the identity of the true owner or controller.

Owners tend to use third parties as:

e Nominee or proxy directors

e Nominee shareholders

e Settlors/protectors

e Parties exercising powers under a power of attorney
e Authorized signatories

e Investment managers /advisors

To ensure that the real owners or controllers have been correctly identified, financial
institutions must undertake SDD on these third parties and fully understand the roles they

CGSS Page 158
Version 1.531
play in managing or dealing with the customer’s assets. If they act on behalf of someone,
identify this individual.

CASE EXAMPLE: RIGGS BANK, 2004

CASE SUMMARY

In September, 1986, the United States considered an attempt to block foreign funding to Chile
in the form of loans from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank because
of human rights abuses. At this time, Chile was governed by the dictator Augusto Pinochet.
Pinochet used torture and murder to eliminate political opposition while embezzling and
using government funds for personal use.

Less than two decades later, on Friday, July 16, 2004, Riggs Bank, which provided banking
services to Pinochet, was acquired by PNC Financial Services. Prior to being acquired, Riggs
Bank had existed for more than 100 years. It was the primary bank in the US capital of
Washington, D.C., and had provided banking to more than 20 US presidents, including
Abraham Lincoln. However, in 1994, officials from Riggs Bank traveled to Chile and offered
their banking services to General Pinochet. From 1994 to 2002, Riggs Bank continued its
relationship, transferring millions of dollars on behalf of Pinochet. Upon discovery, US
regulators investigated and fined Riggs Bank, and the bank ultimately never recovered from
the reputational damage, leading to its eventual acquisition. 10 101, 102

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Banks need to continually monitor the political climate of countries subject to a sanctions
regime for potential changes in the regime.

> Wealth management, with its profit incentives, is a high-risk industry that is often
international in nature.

> Firms should understand the source of funds and wealth of their wealth management
clients.

> Inaddition to sanctions liability, firms should consider the reputational risk from
providing services to persons and entities that are considered for sanctions or are engaged
in activity which fall within the purpose of sanctions. A risk by association could develop
into a more direct risk and needs to be managed accordingly.

 

100 “At Riggs Bank, A Tangled Path Led to Scandal,” The New York Times, July 19, 2004.

101 “Money Laundering and Foreign Corruption: Enforcement and Effectiveness of the Patriot Act: Case
Study Involving Riggs Bank,” US Senate Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Governmental Affairs, July 15, 2004.

102 “Sanctions Issue Splits Chileans,” The Washington Post, September 22, 1986.

CGSS Page 159
Version 1.531
COMMERCIAL AND INVESTMENT BANKING

The commercial and investment banking lines pose similar sanctions risks as those for wealth
management and private banking.

Customers are likely to use or involve complex ownership structures, and it can be difficult to
identify the owners and controllers. It’s critical to obtain sufficient information about the
structures to ensure the customer does not have a beneficial owner who is a sanctions target
and determine that none of the entities involved are captured by the EU or US beneficial
ownership rules. Customers in commercial and investment banking tend to use
intermediaries.

With regard to the nature of business, an organization should investigate how the customer
undertakes SDD on its own customers, counterparties, intermediaries, suppliers, and end
users. It should also determine what industry the customer is in, as well as their actual and
expected counterparties. Certain industries and sectors—such as companies that deal in arms,
natural resources, and goods that could have dual uses—are more prone to sanctions
violations than others. A firm should look at debt and equity financing to ensure the customer
is not restricted under Russian sectoral or Venezuelan sanctions.

When examining jurisdiction/geography, tax residency is a complicating factor, given the
customer’s complex structure. It is important to examine the location of operations and
counterparties and the geographic reach of transactions.

The following questions can be used to clarify the extent of a customer’s “geographic
footprint”:

e What products and services with cross-border features does the customer have access to
(e.g.,a USD account or an investment in USD securities)?

e How will funds linked to sanctions exposure be segregated?
e Will funds from banks related to sanctions exposure pass through the institution?

e What are the existing agreements, intermediaries, advisors, and banks engaged in the
customer’s transactions?

e Are additional controls needed (e.g., adding names of distributors to the list for
screening)?

The financing of debt and equity are important considerations when handling the investment
products business line. Consider the fact that sanctions imposed on Russia, Ukraine, and
Venezuela prohibit sectoral sanctions identifications (SSIs) from raising finances directly or
indirectly through the issuance of new debt or new equity. As part of SDD, an organization
needs to consider whether a proposed transaction has been structured to allow an SSI to
circumvent the sanctions restrictions. And it is important to remember the beneficial owner
aggregate rule, which also applies in this situation.

CGSS Page 160
Version 1.531
Review the example shown in. Entity X owns 55% of Entity A. Entity A is also owned 45% by
Entity Y. Entity X is designated as an SSI, but Entity Y is not. The Russian sectoral sanctions
would still apply to Entity A.

SDD—Commercial Banking/Investments

55% 45%

(PSSI) (Not an SSI)

(DSSI)

TRADE-RELATED ACTIVITY

Financial institutions have a role in trade sanctions, particularly in preventing payments
related to prohibited or restricted trade. In some instances, trade is restricted for only certain
listed individuals, as in the case of a sanction prohibiting the supply of luxury goods to North
Korea. Often trade is restricted for a class of goods, such as those which might be used for non-
peaceful purposes. Those types of sanctions are more difficult to enforce, because they require
detailed scrutiny and understanding of trade-related documentation and an understanding of
sanctions exemptions and licensing.

With regard to trade-related activity, when evaluating a customer’s nature of business, it is
important to consider questions such as:

e What intermediaries or brokers are involved?
e Where are the intermediaries based?
e Who is the end user?

e Areany ofthe parties sanctions targets or denied persons under the US Bureau of Industry
and Security (BIS) list?

CGSS Page 161
Version 1.531
e How will the product be used?

e What evidence can be provided regarding product use?
e Is this use prohibited under an applicable sanction?

e What vessel will be used?

@ Who owns the vessel?

To assess the customer’s jurisdiction/geography, an organization should determine the origin
and destination of goods, as well as the methods and routes by which they will be shipped. It
should identify any jurisdictions through which the goods will be transshipped, including
whether any of these locations are subject to sanctions restrictions. Under what jurisdiction is
the vessel flagged?

The shipment method provides insight into risk. It is well known that individuals who seek to
evade sanctions exploit maritime shipping by trading goods at sea or by dropping goods at
different ports. Even overtly scheduled shipping routes may give rise to sanctions risks.
Consider, for example, the risks posed by a stop at the Sevastopol commercial seaport in
Crimea, given the international sanctions involved in that region. Many of OFAC’s 2016 actions
highlighted a common theme: the shipment of goods and the processing of payments to
sanctioned jurisdictions through third-party countries that are not sanctioned.

CASE EXAMPLE: DUTCH SHIPPING COMPANY, 2016

CASE SUMMARY

In December 2016, a Dutch shipping company engaged a local logistics company, Company
ABC, to ship wooden toys to Ukraine. ABC was owned by a well-regarded French family that
was not listed on any local or international sanctions lists. It in turn engaged a subsidiary of
the Russian Sovofrach Group, which had been sanctioned by the United States in 2016 and
fined by OFAC. Company ABC’s bank received information about the Dutch shipping company
used, but not the Russian subsidiary. This example shows how important itis to include all
parties to the transactions in sanctions screening and customer due diligence processes.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

An organization should:

Assess whether a sanctions risk exposure might exist

Collect all supporting information, including details of all parties to the transactions
Undertake due diligence on all parties

Double check whether any information is missing

VUVVV Vv

Undertake additional research if necesssary

CGSS Page 162
Version 1.531
Useful Documents

The following types of shipping documents are useful for identifying key sanctions risks:

e Bill of exchange: This document is essentially the means by which exporters are paid for
the goods that are to be shipped. They include information such as the names of the
exporter, importer, issuing bank, and the bank where the funds will be drawn.

e Commercial invoice: This document can provide information about the goods involved,
including the quantity, the price, and the names of the seller and buyer.

e End-user certificate: This is used to certify that the buyer is the final recipient of the
materials and is not planning to transfer the materials to another party.

e Packing list: These documents are used when a variety of goods are transported ina single
shipment and will list the contents separately.

e Transport documents: Documents such as bills of lading are an invaluable source of
information for identifying possible jurisdiction SDD risks. A bill of lading identifies the
means of transport, information about the goods, points of loading, transshipment points,
final unloading destination, and the date on which the goods are to be shipped.

Other helpful documents and key information include insurance policies, certificates of origin,
railway consignment notes, airway bills, vessel numbers and flags, and container numbers.

Free Trade Zones/Special Economic Zones

A key risk area related to jurisdiction/geography and specific to trade-related activities is the
Free Trade Zone (FTZ). FTZs, also known as Special Economic Zones (SEZs), have evolved into
various forms and often are referred to by different names in different countries. A general
definition of a FTZ is a delimited geographic area within a country with a zone management
that provides infrastructure and services to tenant companies, and in which the rules for doing
business are different and are promoted by a set of policy instruments that are not generally
applicable to the rest of the country. The first modern zone is said to have been established in
the Navy Yard in Brooklyn, New York, in 1937. The first European Zone, the Shannon Free
Zone in Ireland, was established in 1959 by the Irish government to repurpose the Shannon
International Airport. With more than 4,000 free trade zones in more than 135 countries, FTZs
play an integral role in international trade. Other examples include Gibraltar (1704);
Singapore (1819); Hong Kong, China (1848); Hamburg, Germany (1888); and Copenhagen,
Denmark (1891).

Free trade zones have special regulatory and tax treatments for certain trade-related goods
and services. FTZs are located in developing countries near ports of entry, but are separate
from traditional ports of entry and typically operate under different rules. In addition, FTZs
are located in regional financial centers that link international trade hubs with access to global

CGSS Page 163
Version 1.531
financial markets. Examples of FTZs are the Colon Free Trade Zone in Panama and the
Shanghai Free Trade Zone (officially the China Pilot Free Trade Zone) in China.

FTZs commonly have inadequate sanctions safeguards; minimal oversight by local authorities;
weak procedures to inspect goods and legal entities, including appropriate record-keeping
and information technology systems; and lack of cooperation between the FTZ and the local
customs authorities.

FTZs can offer several geographic advantages and incentives to foreign traders, including tax
exemptions, separate company formation services that require little or no ownership
information, and less regulatory scrutiny because they are not typically subject to the usual
customs controls.

For example, the Jebel Ali Free Zone in Dubai is the world’s largest FTZ. It is especially
attractive as a shipping port to Iranian entities because the local regulations do not require
that local partners own a majority or percentage of the company.

Sanctions targets can misuse FTZs to circumvent sanctions by using them to conceal the
ultimate destination of goods and hide the true beneficial owners of the companies involved.
For this reason, if FTZs are a part of the planned shipping arrangements, it’s critical to
understand the reason for stopping at or transferring goods at them. This includes obtaining
information about the owners and controllers of any companies formed in an FTZ that are
acting as the recipient or sender of goods.

Transshipment

Another jurisdiction risk of trade-related activities is transshipment, which involves the
shipment of goods through an intermediate destination in order to reach the final destination.
Transshipment routes are generally determined by third-party shipping and logistics
companies, based on the most economical or efficient means of delivering cargo. Therefore, it
is important to review transport documents that show the movement of goods and ask
customers to verify whether their shipments will stop in any sanctioned countries or their
ports. An organization should attempt to confirm that goods were delivered in full to the
destination country. The objective is to confirm that no goods left the port area or cleared
customs ifthe transport route included a stop ina sanctioned country.

Trade Networks

Trade networks pose another specific sanctions risk in trade-related activities. Trade
networks are an efficient way of conducting trade because they use a variety of transport
means. For example, train connections between Iran and eastern China could facilitate a rise in
transshipment through Iran. This connection might become more prominent in the context of

CGSS Page 164
Version 1.531
the One Belt, One Road initiative. This ambitious initiative, also known as the New Silk Road,
aims to open new markets for China’s consumer goods and excess industrial capacity. 103

As part of SDD, an organization should assess whether a customer’s trade activity involves
countries that share borders with sanctioned countries, and confirm that goods are delivered
in full to non-sanctioned countries; that is, that there are no stops or customs clearance in
sanctioned jurisdictions.

CORRESPONDENT BANKING

Correspondent banking is the provision of banking or business services by one bank (the
correspondent bank) to another bank (the respondent bank). By establishing multiple
correspondent relationships globally, respondent banks can undertake international financial
transactions for themselves and their customers in jurisdictions where they have no physical
presence. Large international banks typically act as correspondents for thousands of other
banks around the world.

A correspondent bank is effectively acting as its respondent’s agent or conduit, executing
and/or processing payments or other transactions for the respondent’s customers. These
customers may be individuals, legal entities, or even other financial institutions. 14

Respondent banks are banks that access international markets by maintaining an account with
a larger bank with an international presence or reach. Through the relationship, the
respondent bank obtains a wide range of services for itself or its customers that it otherwise
did not have or could not offer. Through correspondent banking relationships, respondent
banks can receive services, including cash management (e.g., interest-bearing accounts ina
variety of currencies), international wire transfers of funds, check clearing, payable-through
accounts, and foreign exchange services.

Before establishing correspondent accounts, banks should be able to answer basic questions
about the respondent bank, including who its owners are and what the nature of its regulatory
oversight is.

Ifa financial institution offers correspondent banking to other firms (e.g.,a correspondent
bank, fund manager, broker, custodian, etc.), the sanctions risks are potentially higher and
more difficult to identify than for other lines of business. By their nature, correspondent
banking relationships create a situation in which a financial institution carries out financial
transactions on behalf of customers of another institution. This indirect relationship means
that the correspondent bank provides services for individuals or entities for which it has
neither verified the identities nor obtained any firsthand knowledge.

 

103 “China’s Massive Belt and Road Initiative,” Council on Foreign Relations.
104 The Wolfsberg Group. Wolfsberg Anti-Money Laundering Principles for Correspondent Banking.

CGSS Page 165
Version 1.531
When evaluating sanctions exposure for a correspondent bank relationship, financial
institutions must at the very least apply the same stringent rules to the correspondent bank
that would be considered appropriate for their own financial institution.

Because correspondent banking is a specialized area, the Wolfsberg Group developed a
specialized questionnaire to collect both KYC and SDD information. There are several more
notable risk areas that should be considered as part of SDD when dealing with correspondent
banking.

When evaluating customer risk, an organization must determine:

e The parent company and its branches and equivalents

e The executive committee, or equivalent, and the supervisory board

e Any other significant controlling interests and their ultimate beneficial owners

e The geographic regions in which their customer base is located

Key factors related to the customer’s nature of business include where it is licensed, the status
of its license, and the maturity of regulation and enforcement in their jurisdiction. The
expected business activity should be monitored against actual activity to identify any
inconsistencies.

Consider downstream activities and the risk of nested accounts (nesting). Nested accounts can
pose an elevated sanctions risk because they are one step removed from the underlying
originator/ beneficiary. (This is why it is important for a correspondent bank and any affiliates
to demonstrate that they can apply effective controls to their downstream correspondent
banking customers.) An organization should determine the license status and the existence of
payable-through accounts.

Assessing the adequacy of a correspondent relationship’s sanctions compliance program
involves first conducting research to determine if the institution was previously the subject of
a sanctions violation. This information can be found in open sources and through inquiries
with their regulator. It is also possible to ask for audit reports, both internal and external,
which evaluate the effectiveness of their sanctions program. Those reports may shed light on
weaknesses that could increase the probability ofa sanctions violation in the future.

When examining jurisdiction/geography, it is important to keep in mind that entities that are
located in countries subject to sanctions (e.g., North Korea) can facilitate transactions by
setting up shell entities in other jurisdictions, such as in the United Arab Emirates or Turkey. A
correspondent banking relationship can be used between these shell entities and a domestic
bank in order to access the financial system through their intermediary shell company ina
country that does not have restrictions.

A customer may not be a sanctioned individual, but he or she may be linked to a business that
is then linked to a sanctioned individual. An organization needs to identify and assess that
risk; therefore, after it first checks the customer, it should perform a second check later on any
entities (e.g.,a sanctioned bank) and individuals identified during SDD research.

CGSS Page 166
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE: NORTH KOREA FRONT COMPANIES, 2016

CASE SUMMARY

In September 2016, the US Department of Justice filed criminal charges against Ma Xiaohong,
majority owner of the Dandong Hongxiang Industrial Development Company (DHID), an
industrial machinery and equipment wholesaler in China, and several associates, for working
on behalf of a sanctioned North Korean bank (Korea Kwangson Banking Corp) to evade US
sanctions.

According to the criminal complaint, DHID used at least 22 different front companies,
spanning from the British Virgin Islands to Hong Kong to England, to engage in US dollar
transactions. Names of front companies ranged from “Go Tech Investment Ltd.” in the
Seychelles to “Blue Sea Business Co. Ltd.” in Wales. The location of Blue Sea appeared to bea
nondescript walk-up apartment with no signage and no exterior number, and, according to
public database information, was the incorporation address for many other companies.

All in all, the justice department said that DHID’s illicit network consisted of 43 total business
entities across four continents. Ma has since disappeared.19>. 106

KEY TAKEAWAYS:

> Anorganization must undertake sufficient due diligence to be able to identify and confirm
the UBO of customers and any other relevant entities linked to the UBO in relation to any
transactions.

> Related account parties are additional key members of the customer’s organizational
structure and Key entities to the customer’s activity, such as with third-party guarantors to
a transaction; as such, they need to be included in the SDD research model.

> Geographic risk must always be assessed. A customer whose major suppliers, purchasers,
shipping paths, etc., are all located in low-risk jurisdictions will be lower risk froma
sanctions perspective than a customer whose suppliers are in high-risk jurisdictions,
whose goods go through high-risk jurisdictions or free-trade zones, and who otherwise
conducts activity with other entities in high-risk jurisdictions.

INSURANCE

Some sanctions include restrictions on the provision of insurance, brokering, and advisory
services. Depending on how an institution organizes its service offerings, these activities might
reside in their own lines of business or under another business line. This discussion refers to

 

105 “How North Korea Uses Front Companies to Help Evade Sanctions,” Frontline, October 3, 2017.
106 “US charges four Chinese, firm with aiding Pyongyang’s nuclear program,” The Washington Post,
September 26, 2016.

CGSS Page 167
Version 1.531
an insurance business that is a customer of a financial institution, as opposed to an institution
selling insurance as a separate line of business.

There are several risks specific to insurance companies as customers. Consider the following
questions:

e Does the customer use brokers or intermediaries in jurisdictions known to be high risk for
SDD purposes?

e Are their brokers required to do SDD checks on individuals for whom they underwrite
policies?

e Who is the target customer base?

e What are their procedures to identify the beneficial owner(s) of their customers?

Regarding the customer’s nature of business, an organization should examine the products
(e.g., cash aspects of life insurance/annuities), policy coverage, and investment-based
insurance products. Consider the example ofa life insurance company in which a policyholder
can operate entirely within non-sanctions risk parameters, but by virtue of their insured
activity engage in a one-time heightened sanctions compliance risk. For example, a life
insurance company could issue a policy with an unknown beneficiary. Upon being required to
pay out, the insurance company could discover the beneficiary to be a sanctioned individual or
related to a sanctioned individual.

Investment-based insurance products that are provided ina “wrapper” (i.e., instruments into
which investors can place stocks, hedge funds, or other bankable assets, allowing them to pay
less tax on investment income) can potentially be caught by sectoral sanctions, such as those
imposed against Russia. An organization should determine how the insurer checks for such
situations. As with correspondent banking, it is vital to obtain information about the adequacy
of the insurer’s sanctions compliance program. When insurance is provided through an agent,
broker, or other third party, an organization must verify what measures the insurer takes to
ensure they have controls in place to identify and mitigate sanctions risks.

From the perspective of jurisdiction/geography, an organization should determine in which
countries the customer sells its products and identify their geographic scope of coverage. It is
important to determine where their brokers and intermediaries are based and where the
products are sold. Is the policy coverage domestic or overseas? Consider a scenario in which a
customer travels to a low-risk jurisdiction, such as the Indian Ocean, and a medical emergency
or humanitarian crisis results in his or her presence in Iran. Would the financial institution be
expected to pay out the policy to an account in Iran to pay for the required medical treatment?

OTHER INDUSTRIES

Seemingly mundane or ordinary industries can still have exposure to sanctions risk. When
sanctions loopholes are closed, those individuals and entities being sanctioned can seek
alternatives to circumvent the sanctions in an ongoing game of “cat and mouse.” The North

CGSS Page 168
Version 1.531
Korean government in particular exports numerous laborers to fulfill contracts abroad with
the revenues going to the North Korean government. The industries include “apparel,
construction, footwear manufacturing, hospitality, IT services, logging, medical,
pharmaceuticals, restaurants, seafood processing, textiles, and shipbuilding.” 1°7 Although
China and Russia utilize the most North Korean overseas labor, other countries such as
Singapore, the UAE, and Poland have been reported as having hosted forced labor. The US
State Department and other nonprofit organizations provide reports and lists on countries
hosting North Korean laborers on an ongoing basis.

In April 2019, it was widely reported that North Korea was reportedly using cryptocurrency to
evade sanctions and fund the development of nuclear weapons. A study published by the
established and well-regarded Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) revealed how the
exploitation of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies through cybercrime activities offers a
“financial lifeline” to North Korea as it seeks to develop its weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) program.

Real Estate

Real estate purchases made in cash by US-based limited liability corporations or trust
structures can enable buyers to avoid detection; the same is true in Europe, where ownership
information is not public.

In 2018, the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime identified 44 properties
in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) worth approximately $28.2 million that were directly
associated with sanctioned individuals, as well as 37 properties worth approximately $78.8
million within their expanded networks. Each of these individuals had been sanctioned by the
United States, and many also were designated by the European Union and EU Member States.
Such sources of information should be consulted when an institution is involved with real
estate transactions in the Middle East, for example.

101 “North Korea Sanctions & Enforcement Actions Advisory: Risks for
Businesses with Supply Chain Links to North Korea,” US Department of the Treasury, July
23,2018.

The following is a list of red flags identified by the researchers:

e The properties associated with the sanctioned individuals were directly connected to
information within their sanctions designations. A total of 44 properties were identified

 

107 “North Korea Sanctions & Enforcement Actions Advisory: Risks for Businesses with Supply Chain
Links to North Korea,” US Department of the Treasury,
July 23, 2018.

CGSS Page 169
Version 1.531
that were associated with the primary sanctioned subjects across the seven profiles, of
which 42 were previously unidentified.

e Expansive unsanctioned corporate networks, often with direct ties to the individuals’
Dubai properties, extended to jurisdictions as wide ranging as Syria, Romania, Mexico,
Cyprus, Lebanon, Hong Kong, the United States, Liberia, and the British Virgin Islands.

e There was extensive use of family and third-party networks, such as lawyers, business
partners, and nominees to obscure beneficial ownership of both sanctioned and
unsanctioned commercial entities.

e Research identified ongoing activities for which the individuals and networks were
originally sanctioned—activities that were, in some cases, more prolific than they were
prior to the sanctions.

An example from the report: Wael Abdulkarim and Ahmad Barqawi were sanctioned for
smuggling fuel to Syria in support of the government’s military operations. They were
associated with three properties in the UAE that were collectively worth $867,067. These
individuals also continued smuggling fuel to Syria at a higher frequency than before the
sanctions, using the same vessels as well as previously unidentified and unsanctioned vessels
and companies.

Luxury Goods

The luxury goods industry can carry specific sanctions risks. Jurisdictions that have been
subject to sanctions measures for some time, and thus have been frozen out of the global
financial system, are likely to be “cash-rich” and key consumers of luxury goods. Examples of
luxury goods include:

e Villas, apartments, and estates

e Sports cars

e Gemstones and jewelry

e Fineart

e §=©Antiquities

The key sanctions risk areas for customers (including producers, dealers, and collectors) in

the luxury goods sector are similar to those for other high-risk lines of business. It is
important to understand the target customer base and end users.

The nature of the business and the provenance of the goods (i.e., the chain of ownership and
authenticity) involved are risk factors unique to this business. For example, there have beena
number of reports about antiquities being looted from Syria and then sold to dealers outside

CGSS Page 170
Version 1.531
of the region. Sanctions targets also can attempt to sell stolen goods, or goods purchased with
corrupt earnings, via a dealer or wholesaler.

It is important to understand a customer’s products and whether they are wholesale, retail, or
resale. An organization should assess the volume of international transactions, the frequency
of thirdparty recipients (“gifts”), the provenance of goods, and the adequacy of the customer’s
sanctions compliance program.

With regard to the jurisdiction/geography factor in the luxury goods business, a
determination should be made as to whether overseas shipping is part of the customer’s
service. It is also important to locate the target customer base. Certain goods and parts ofthe
world, such as luxury real estate in Dubai, watches in Switzerland, and yachts in the
Mediterranean, are known for having customers who are repeat purchasers of luxury goods.
Are there sanctions risks associated with those jurisdictions?

CASE EXAMPLE: RICHEMONT NA, 2017

CASE SUMMARY
Richemont North America, Inc., the parent company of the luxury brand Cartier, was fined USD

$335,000 for violating US narcotics trafficking sanctions. An individual purchased jewelry
from boutiques located in California and Nevada and requested that the jeweler ship them to
another address—that ofa specially designated national (SDN). The buyer provided the SDN’s
name and mailing address for the shipment. That address was included in the SDN list, but
Richemont did not identify the sanctions risk. 108 109

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Allavailable information should be screened against SDN and other lists, as this can be
helpful in identifying sanctioned individuals and entities.

> Anorganization should develop red flag indicators, such as a request to ship to another
address.

> Itis important to undertake enhanced due diligence on high-risk products, such as high-
value goods. Additional research could have helped uncover the sanctions risk in this case.

 

108 “Settlement Agreement between the US Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets
Control and Richemont North America, Inc. d.b.a. Cartier,”
US Department of the Treasury, September 26, 2017.

109 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for September 26, 2017.

CGSS Page 171
Version 1.531
Precious Metals and Mining

UN resolutions targeting and sanctioning warlords and perpetrators of human rights abuses in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) are an example of sanctions restrictions targeted
at the high-risk precious metals and mining industries. In November 2012, escalation of
fighting in the eastern province of the DRC, involving the notorious rebel group M23 and
government forces, brought the decade-long armed conflict in that region to the top of the
international agenda. As a consequence, direct and indirect support for armed conflict by way
of criminal offenses connected to the mining and processing of 3TG minerals (tantalum,
tungsten, tin, and gold) poses a serious risk. This type of sanctions risk exposure sits at the
nexus to other due diligence requirements set out by the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) in relation to human rights violations.

Supply chain due diligence can help to ensure the integrity of direct and indirect suppliers
given the potentially great number of suppliers who may, by their associations and practices,
pose a serious sanctions risk and reputation risk by association.

EMERGING THREATS

As stated previously, it is essential that compliance professionals stay current on sanctions.
This includes keeping informed of emerging threats, such as cyber-enabled crime.

Cyber-Related Sanctions

In April of 2015, OFAC implemented its Cyber-Related Sanctions program because of the
president’s Executive Order (E.O.) 13694. The president had declared a national emergency
“to deal with the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and
economy of the United States constituted by the increasing prevalence and severity of
malicious cyber-enabled activities originating from, or directed by persons located, in whole
or in substantial part, outside the United States.”110

This order authorized the imposition of sanctions against people deemed responsible for
various malicious cyber-enabled activities. On December 28, 2016, E.0. 13757 was issued,
which amended E.O. 13694 to include the authorization of sanctions related to interfering
with election processes or institutions.

This is an example of the need to anticipate future risks.

 

110 OFAC, “Cyber-Related Sanctions Program,” July 3, 2017.

CGSS Page 172
Version 1.531
Technology Companies

Additionally, technology companies can be used to evade sanctions. For example, in May of
2019, BIS added Huawei to the EAR Entities List due to its involvement in activities that were
contrary to the foreign policy or national security interest of the US. Specifically, the US
District Court for the Eastern District of New York indicted Huawei for thirteen counts of
violating US law by making transactions with Iran and doing business with Iran-based telecom
companies.!11 According to the indictment, Skycom Tech Co. Ltd was a corporation whose
primary operations were in Iran. Huawei operated Skycom as an unofficial subsidiary to
obtain otherwise prohibited US-origin goods, technology, and services, including banking
services, for Huawei’s Iran-based business while concealing the link to Huawei. The case
claims that Huawei’s networking equipment poses a national security threat.112

It would be impossible to predict every act that could pose a sanctions threat; however, it is
important to consider how industries traditionally considered low-risk could be used to evade
sanctions.

 

111 84 FR 22961, May 21, 2019.
112 United States of America v. Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd Et Al, United States District Court, Eastern
District of New York, January 24, 2019.

CGSS Page 173
Version 1.531
Sanctions Screening

Sanctions Screening

 

Sanctions screening is one of the key controls of an effective sanctions compliance program. In
simple terms, screening involves checking information obtained about a person, entity, goods,
or services against sanctions lists that prohibit making funds or financial services available
and/or restrict or prohibit trade in certain goods or services. When screening generates an
alert, the data is reviewed and assessed. An alert is a review ofa hit, or multiple hits, of
internal record information checked against sanctions screening lists. One alert generally
includes the internal record information and the hits against the various discrete entries on
the sanctions lists with the percentage match (threshold).

When a true match is identified, or a potential match cannot be discounted, the alert is
escalated through a dedicated flow in the screening tool, or via other communication channels
in the case of manual screening or filtering. The sanctions compliance officer (SCO) receives
the alert, reviews it, conducts further investigation if necessary, and reports as appropriate.

This chapter describes screening targets, name screening, payment screening, information
technology, regulatory matters, and trade-activity screening.

Screening Targets

Who and what are the targets of sanctions screening? Unlike anti-money laundering (AML)
requirements, which are limited to customers of the business, sanctions restrictions apply to
all business activities and therefore to third parties. The types of different business activities
and, in turn, the types of parties that should be screened, include, but are in no way limited to,
the following business arrangements:

e Brokers
e Agents
e Vendors and other intermediaries

e Trade finance and export-related activities

CGSS Page 174
Version 1.531
e Purchasing, order processing, distribution, and payment management

e Beneficial owners

The following are examples of the business arrangements that can present sanctions risks and
suggestions for mitigating the risks:

e Joint ventures and mergers involving multiple parties can present sanctions risks. There
are beneficial owners and controllers to consider, as well as the types of goods and
services involved, and where they came from. It is important to learn the identity and
activity of all business parties.

e Inmergers and acquisitions, businesses “inherit” the sanctions violations committed by
the company they acquire. In such cases, checking a business’ sanctions compliance
history is an important part of the due diligence that is undertaken before a business is
purchased.

e When subcontractors and distributors are involved ina project, it is necessary to check
their sanctions compliance history, as well as the identity of their owners and directors
and the activities in which they engage.

e Although brokers and agents are not always physically close and in regular contact with an
organization, financial institutions are required to take steps to ensure that these parties,
who are acting on behalf of the institution, comply with sanctions restrictions.

Organizations must look carefully at parties and processes related to purchasing, order
processing, distribution, and payment management. It is wise not to assume that “back office”
activities are not affected by sanctions. Something as simple as a supply contract that permits
the payment of third parties that were not identified when the agreement was first signed can
result in payments being made to a sanctions target.

In regard to suppliers and service parties (both new and existing, including those with whom
the business has a longstanding relationship), the following questions should be asked:

e Do they sell to sanctioned countries?

e Do they finance in sanctioned countries?

e Who are the beneficial owners and controllers?

e In what jurisdictions are operations located?

e In what jurisdictions are parts and products sourced?

e What are the locations and activities of any subsidiaries?

e From what jurisdictions are payments received, paid, and/or processed?

e Areany of the officers, directors, controllers, or owners sanctions targets?

CGSS Page 175
Version 1.531
The same scrutiny is necessary for accounts receivable services. The financial institution must
understand who is being paid, if those parties have changed since the agreement was signed,
where they are located, and where payments are made. It should confirm that there are no
payees who are listed as sanctions targets and that payees do not request payment
arrangements that appear to constitute sanctions evasion.

Name Screening vs. Payment Screening

It’s important to understand the differences between name screening and payment screening.
Name screening is the process of matching an internal record (customer, counterparty, related
account party) against a sanctioned list record, either manually or through an automated
screening tool. Name screening may also include batch screening, which allows a firm to
screen its entire customer base and other entities, such as vendors, using automatic screening
tools on a periodic basis. When onboarding new customers, sanctions screening is undertaken
prior to accepting a new customer relationship, and is done in real time. Name screening
forms a part of entry controls, which gives the financial institution more opportunities to
collect sanctions due diligence (SDD) information. It is generally more feasible to stopa
customer’s onboarding when list screening flags a possible connection between a customer
and a sanctions list.

Payment screening focuses of screening payment messages. Unlike name screening, payment
screening takes place with current customers and is performed before a payment or message
is processed. Payment screening relies on payment messages using predefined templates,
codes, and acronyms to describe certain information. The information provided in these
predefined templates is typically provided by a third party; therefore, the firm has little, ifany,
control over how the data is presented.

Financial institutions are required to freeze or block assets of sanctions targets, and are
prohibited from dealing in the funds of a sanctions target. When an institution relies on batch
screening for payments, screening is taking place ex-post—after the transaction has been
processed. This method fails to ensure that the institution stops a payment to a sanctions
target. Therefore, from an operational and regulatory expectation, payment screening must
take place in real time or ex-ante—before payments are processed. This is due to the
immediate liability aspect of sanctions.

Furthermore, the introduction of faster payment processing and other systems means
screening payments in real time can be a challenge, especially when a red flag is raised and
further inquiry is needed. This is complicated by the fact that there is generally a business
requirement to get payment messages processed daily. A red flag is a fact pattern based ona
known activity used to evade regulations or engage in illicit activity. Red flags are grouped
into typologies, or known techniques for evading regulations and engaging in illicit activity.

In payment screening, because firms receive information from outside parties, the quality may
be beyond a firm’s control. For this reason, it is important to apply human intelligence and

CGSS Page 176
Version 1.531
judgment to the screening process and to work on, as necessary, the ongoing recalibration of
software, data cleaning, and remediation to sustain an effective screening operation.

Information Technology

 

Information technology (IT) is a foundational component ofa strong sanctions screening
program. The saying “Garbage in, garbage out” means that the results of screening are only as
good as the data feeding the automated screening tools. The New York State Department of
Financial Services

(NYDFS), in its Part 504 requirements, provides guidance concerning data quality and the
process used to determine which alerts are generated for review. As such, the IT component
demands a structured and rigorous approach.

This section describes automated screening tools; algorithms and tuning; the payment
screening process; mapping requirements; data, data flows, and data validation; and
operational controls.

An important point to remember is that tools are only as good as they are configured. Also, it is
possible for unscrupulous parties to learn a tool’s limitations. Financial institutions cannot
simply set their automation tools and forget them; they need to be updated regularly to reflect
changes, such as new types of sanctions and revised regulations. Effective and ongoing
employee training in the use of the tools is also key to their effectiveness, and vendors should
supply the organization with updated technical guidance and training as necessary.

Automated Screening Tools

Large financial institutions often incorporate an automated screening tool (AST) into their
screening process. ASTs are software systems used by financial institutions and other firms to
facilitate the screening process, as opposed to manual screening. In general, ASTs are designed
to screen against sanctions lists. ASTs generate hits against sanctions lists that may be
consolidated into alerts based on, for example, a customer record. For one customer record,
there may be multiple hits against sanctions lists that are consolidated under one alert.

According to the Wolfsberg Group, a successful sanctions screening program should have a
screening application. While an institution could build its own application internally, it is likely
that a large institution will source its application (AST) from a vendor. The institution needs to
consider its size, geographic presence, business, and technology environment when choosing
an AST vendor. There is no “one size fits all” method for implementing an AST, so an
institution should analyze its identified sanctions risks and specific functional requirements.

CGSS Page 177
Version 1.531
Per the “Wolfsberg Guidance on Sanctions Screening,” an institution needs to consider the
following froma risk standpoint:

e The sophistication and configurability of the matching software

e Availability of screening rules to optimize alert creation/suppression

e Support for the screening or transformation of data in non-Latin characters
e Ad hoc, one-off, or manual screening functionality

e Workflow configurability

e Availability of metrics reporting

From a functional standpoint, consideration should be given to the volume of data to be
screened; the support for multiple local installations or a single centralized installation; the
existence of, or support for, data integrity processes; and the ability of the application to
integrate effectively within a financial institution’s technology infrastructure.

Once risk and functional requirements have been identified, a financial institution should
achieve a balance between the standard vendor functionality and configurability ofa
purchased solution against the cost to build and maintain a more bespoke application
internally. It is critical to understand whether sufficient compliance and technology expertise
and resources exist within the financial institution or chosen vendor (and will continue to
exist) to sustain the design, build, and/or implementation processes, while remaining well-
informed on emerging sanctions risks that arise as a result of evolving regulatory frameworks
or business expansion and strategy. 113

Regulators emphasize the fact that an automated screening tool is just that—a tool. ASTs do
not completely substitute for a sound understanding about the customer relationship and the
expected level of activity and behavior. Ideally, monitoring should be a combination of both
manual and automated screening methods. Table 7 compares the benefits and costs associated
with automated and manual screening.

Table 7: Sanctions Monitoring: Benefits and Costs of Automated vs. Manual Screening

 

 

Type of Screening | Benefits Costs
Manual e Human judgment e Human error
e Cost-saving (up to a certain e Resource-intensive
volume)

e Documentation

e Record retention

 

 

 

 

 

 

113 The Wolfsberg Group, “Wolfsberg Guidance on Sanctions Screening,” 2019.

CGSS Page 178
Version 1.531
 

Automated e Continuous screening e Licensing

e Minimizes human error e Specific training
e Quickly screens documents e Calibration of thresholds
e Case management e False negatives

e Familiarityamongregulators |e Model validation

 

 

 

 

 

There are many different sanctions lists, and targets can be named on more than one list. Most
ASTs are designed to allow users to select which lists to screen. The following are the lists
most commonly used for screening:

e UN Security Council Consolidated Sanctions List
e EU Consolidated Financial Sanctions List

e US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons List (SDN list)

- OFAC Non-SDN Palestinian Legislative Council List
e Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) List of Denied Persons
e Financial Action Task Force (FATF) List of High-Risk and Other Monitored Jurisdictions
e UK Her Majesty’s (HM) Treasury Consolidated List of Financial Sanctions Targets

e Other countries’ lists

Moreover, the selection of lists should consider whether a financial institution’s host country
has its own autonomous sanctions or equivalent as well as those countries with which the
financial institution regularly engages.

Another set of controls is the “inequalities” list, which is compiled by financial organizations,
as opposed to outside vendors. The purpose of this list is to limit the number of parties that
might be identified as possible matches to names on sanctions lists. Once flagged and classified
as false positive data, the AST should suppress future hits based on similar data.

An inequalities list is a list of words or names that automated screening tools often mistake as
matches and thereby create potential matches to targets named on sanctions lists. These are
words or names that the organization’s compliance team has checked and confirmed do not
actually match up with a target’s record on a sanctions list, such as Andrew and Andrea. An
addition to an inequalities list will apply the inequality to all future screened instances and
decrease the likelihood ofa future match. Therefore, inequalities lists should have sufficient
controls (at least dual controls) for additions to the list and periodic review. In the above
example, having Andrew and Andrea may be fine when screening against static customer data
where the data quality is generally better. However, for payment screening, Andrew and

CGSS Page 179
Version 1.531
Andrea may easily be the result of a typo by a third party and may therefore unintentionally
exclude potential matches. For this reason, dual controls and periodic reviews are important.

Fine-Tuning Screening Algorithms

The key to effective screening is the coding used by the AST to detect possible matches. ASTs
use a mix of fuzzy logic, algorithms, and scenarios to do this.

FUZZY LOGIC AND PARTIAL MATCHING

Sanctions targets often use different names to evade detection. Sometimes the challenge of
screening parties against sanctions lists is compounded by a financial institution’s flawed
records and databases. Two techniques that help overcome this problem are the use of fuzzy
logic and partial matching.

Fuzzy logic is a matching technique used by financial institutions to increase the effectiveness
of screening processes by overcoming problems such as flawed records and databases. This
technique is accomplished through algorithms that use “degrees of similarity” to determine
the probability that two names are the same. Fuzzy logic can find matches in misspelled
names, incomplete names, and names with different spellings but similar sounds or phonetics.
In addition, fuzzy logic accepts different formats for date of birth and other inconsistencies.
Although fuzzy logic increases the likelihood of identifying potential target matches, it can also
increase the number of false positives.

It’s important to note that regulators expect that ASTs used for sanctions screening apply
fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic is accomplished through several common algorithms, including:

e Phonetic: This method reduces names to a key or code based on their pronunciation, so
that similar sounding names share the same key. An example is “Bougourd” and
“Bugourd.”

e Edit Distance or Levenshtein: This method examines how many character changes it takes
to get from one name to another. For example, “Timmy” and “Tymmi” have an edit

ton a

distance of 1 since “i” and “y” are merely transposed.

e Equivalence and Non-Equivalence: This method teaches the system through human
feedback which similarities are equivalent and non-equivalent. Some systems have
equivalence and non-equivalence built in or sourced from a group of users. In one example
of equivalence, “Gaddafi,” “Kaddafi,” and “Qadhafi” would all be treated as equivalent. In an
example of non-equivalence, the actor “Cuba Gooding, Jr.” and the address “Avenida Cuba y
Calle 38 Este Numbero” would not trigger a sanctions hit on the country “Cuba.” (Also see
inequalities list.)

CGSS Page 180
Version 1.531
Even when an automated tool is not available, organizations adopt a “fuzzy logic” approach
when manually screening customers through the use of human intuition. For example, if news
reports were to refer to US President Donald Trump as just “the Donald,” “Don Trump,” or
some other nickname (i.e.,a shortened or familiar name), most listeners understand this
refers to Donald Trump and not some other Donald or Don. In fact, fuzzy logic is the coding of
human experience into a repeatable algorithm. As such, it is only as good as the underlying
design and ongoing feedback that it receives.

When a firm’s AST generates a result based on fuzzy logic, it is often presented as a partial
match, meaning the entity being screened is similar enough to the sanctioned entity based on
fuzzy logic and potentially other identifying factors, such as date of birth. Partial matches
require further human intervention to determine whether the match is a target match (or true
match), i.e., the name being screened is the same entity as the sanctioned target.

COMMON ALGORITHMS

Algorithms are essentially the “brains” of an AST. They combine several search methods and
assign a weighting or a possible match to a sanctions target named on a list. In general, the
results are produced showing a weighting score between 0 and 50. The calibration setting of
ASTs can have an impact upon the number of hits generated.

It’s important to note that the results generated by an AST can include several alerts about the
same sanctions target; this occurs when the same sanctions target appears on more than one
list and/or when there are several elements within a payment message that match the
algorithms set in the AST.

Examples of some of the basic algorithms used by most ASTs include noisy or neutral words,
common words, and surnames vs. forenames.

Noisy or Neutral Words

Noisy, or neutral, words are words used frequently, such as “the,” “and,” and “of.” An AST will
allocate a lower weighting or even disregard these words when screening names. The noisy
algorithm also ensures that possible matches are not dismissed because ofa slight variation in
the use of these types of words.

Common Words

Another algorithm, common words, relates to the weighting or importance given to common
words that appear to match those ona sanctions list. This algorithm is used for the same
reason as eliminating the noisy words. An example of the common words algorithm is
“National Bank of Sudan” vs. “National Bank of Iceland”—the words “National bank of” would
be given a low weighting.

CGSS Page 181
Version 1.531
Surnames vs. Forenames

With the surnames vs. forenames algorithm, an AST applies more weight to last names, or
surnames, than to first names, or forenames. This technique reduces the risk of a target being
missed or not detected by an AST simply because of the spelling of the first name (e.g., Jean
Luc Pickard vs. Gean Luc Pickard vs. J.L. Pickard). This method may be more applicable to
Western names, however, because there are cultural differences in how names are written.

CASE EXAMPLE: CITIGROUP, 2014

CASE SUMMARY

In 2014, Citigroup settled potential civil liability with OFAC for, in part, failing to accurately
identify a sanctions target. Its screening tool missed the similarity between the words “for”
and “of.” Citigroup had processed a payment to the Higher Institute OF Applied Sciences, based
in Syria. When the payment message was received, the name of the recipient was identified as
the Higher Institute FOR Applied Science.

The bank’s AST screening tool failed to identify the name as a possible match and did not
generate an alert. The transactions were processed without manual intervention, and
Citigroup did not voluntarily disclose these apparent violations. 114. 115, 116

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Itis critical for an organization to effectively calibrate its screening tools so that they
would search for both “for” and “of,” and not exclude either one or the other.

> When onboarding a technology solution, an organization should ensure it has good test
examples to use on the algorithms to make sure the system is effectively mitigating its
sanctions risk exposure.

> The tool should be recalibrated regularly in order to update the systems based on lessons
learned from individual cases.

Other Algorithms

e Glued and split words: This algorithm pertains to “joined up” or “glued” words (also
known as concatenated), and their opposites, “split words.” For glued words, these
algorithms are designed to address the problem of key terms like “Iran” being combined
with innocuous terms like “transaction” to decrease the degree of overlap with a list. For

 

114 “Citigroup in OFAC settlement,” Bankers Online, September 4, 2014.

115 “Citigroup settles potential liability for Iran-related and Kingpin-related transactions resulting from
screening failures,” Lexology, September 15, 2014.

116 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for September 3, 2014.

CGSS Page 182
Version 1.531
example, when comparing the term “Iran” to “Iran” there is 100% overlap, but when
comparing “irantransaction” to “Iran,” the degree of overlap decreases. For “split words”
the algorithms are important to help detect evasion attempts in which sanctions targets
intentionally add spaces to their names or other key terms. An example of this is the
surname “Newman.” Ifa space is added it becomes two innocuous words, “new” and

‘ ”

man.

e Word order swapping and omitted names: There are also algorithms to address word
order swapping; that is, when the words are ordered in different ways—whether using
correct or altered names—such as with “Bank Sudan National” vs. “National Bank of
Sudan.” Swapping names is often due to the format of the database in which names are
entered, or it can be caused by a lack of knowledge about cultural naming conventions.

e Missing names: The algorithm designed to address missing names or parts of names works
in a similar way to the algorithms that handle glued and split words. It would capture, for
example, “Abdullah Al-Ashgar” when “Abdullah Bin Hassan Al Ashqar’” is the full name.

UPDATING ALGORITHMS AND CALIBRATING THRESHOLDS

ASTs use interdiction software to match parties ina financial institution’s databases to names
on sanctions lists in order to stop, or interdict, the processing of transactions until a match is
resolved. The software uses threshold calibration to determine which alerts to generate.

A threshold is typically described in terms ofa percentage of a match to a particular algorithm
or scenario. If the percentage is set too high, for example, only a few names will match. This
increases the potential occurrence of false negatives, which describes screened activity that
would have generated a hit had the screening process been calibrated to catch such activity,
but instead the possible alerts are dismissed, causing the institution to miss a match to a target
named ona sanctions list.

If the threshold percentage is too low, the tool will produce an excess of results, many of which
will be false positives, or hits identified during the screening process as possible matches, but
when reviewed, are found not to bea match to a target named on a sanctions list. An
overabundance of false positives leads to the inefficient use of resources due to the large
number of hits that need to be checked against sanctions lists.

In order to set the tool’s threshold correctly, the business needs to understand the tool and
know the institution’s greatest areas of sanctions risk. It is best for an organization to base its
thresholds on the level of control it has over the data. For example, for screening its customer
base, the organization may have high-quality data and thus firm control over its data; in this
case, the thresholds would be set higher. However, when an organization’s screening data is
provided by a third party, such as a wire transfer, it is best to establish lower thresholds to
account for human error, differing institutional standards, and other external variances over
which it has no or little control.

CGSS Page 183
Version 1.531
Algorithms must be updated and reconfigured as external information becomes available, as
the institution’s internal investigations reveal new trends, and as financial crime activity
develops and changes over time. Regular interaction with vendors is key so that the system is
using the most up-to-date technology available to manage its sanctions risk exposure.

Importantly, calibration requires documentation. Changes to the model, testing of thresholds,
and results all should be thoroughly documented. In addition, it is important to remember that
screening tools facilitate, but do not replace, the human analysis required to determine
whether a true match has been identified.

Scenarios

Ascenario is a set of rules or models that reflect known sanctions typologies or ways in which
sanctions violations occur. Scenarios are identified through:

e Industry sources, such as FATF and FATF-Style Regional Bodies (FSRBs)

e Anorganization’s sanctions risk assessment results

e Historical detection indicators, such as previous positive hits and true matches generated
during the sanctions screening process

Scenarios enhance an AST’s ability to detect possible sanctions violations specific to an

organization. Scenarios can help to detect red flags such as:

e Using the financial institution’s address in payment message fields where the customer’s
address should be disclosed

e Resubmitting payment messages that were previously rejected, but removing or altering
information

e Submitting payment messages that include multiple, unrelated customers with the same
physical address

Scenarios should be based on actual historical data, similar to the examples above.

Note that ASTs typically include several standard scenarios to use in screening; however, to
use the tool effectively, organizations should develop original scenarios tailored to their
specific business to help identify sanctions risks that are realistic and consistent with their
experience. Once developed, the organization can use a testing period to verify whether the
scenarios generate hits that reflect sanctions risks specific to its business.

CGSS Page 184
Version 1.531
Understanding Mapping Requirements

In addition to determining how alerts are being generated using fuzzy logic, it is vitally
important to determine how the various systems and databases within a firm are mapped or
connected to the AST. Payment messages contain many fields of information, and the
information in each field is unique to that field. ASTs may require mapping from the SWIFT (or
other type of message) to the AST to ensure the AST is using the proper methods for
screening. For example, some fields only contain

Bank Identification Codes (BIC); therefore, screening this field against the entirety of the OFAC
list with its acronyms would generate numerous false positives. With proper mapping from
this field to the AST, the AST would only screen this field against sanctioned BIC codes (i.e.,
sanctioned banks).

Conversely, ifa field from SWIFT were incorrectly mapped, the result could be severe under-
screening of the message. Screening the freeform text in the purpose of payment field only
against sanctioned BIC codes would result in the high potential for false negatives.

Organizations should review their system architecture upon its initial development and upon
any additional changes to it. The scope and sophistication of these reviews should align with
the size and complexity of the organization. Organizations should also consider reviewing
their system architecture at least annually, regardless of whether changes occur, to ensure
operational effectiveness and identify areas for improvement and enhancement.

Data, Data Flows, and Data Validation

Because IT and data are fundamental parts of ASTs, it is important for sanctions compliance
teams to work with IT to properly understand how data works within the firm, where data is
stored, what data is available, and the quality of the data. In large firms, this can be a very
difficult task, as sales data, operations data, and risk data require review and comparison to
ensure important information is not being overlooked. It is also important to understand how
data is being extracted (i.e., taken from one system, transformed or modified, and loaded or
ingested between systems). Sometimes important data can be lost or modified through the
extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL) process from one system to another in ways
that can result ina compliance breach.

Operational Controls

Because ASTs can be very complex, operational controls should also be in place to limit the
users’ access to only those functions that are required to perform their roles. For example, an
individual who resolves alerts generated by the system generally would not have the rights to

CGSS Page 185
Version 1.531
change the settings, such as the thresholds for fuzzy logic. This is known as the concept of least
privilege, or only having the access necessary for the individual to perform his or her role.

Similarly, firms must have controls in place to ensure access rights to the AST are reviewed on
a periodic basis to enforce least privilege and prevent modifications, either accidental or
intentional, without the requisite governance and oversight.

Analytics and Emerging Technology

Information technology is constantly advancing to meet the evolving sanctions threat and
increasing demand for better solutions. With the increasing level of fines and enforcement
actions, financial institutions and other firms have hired more people and invested in robotics,
analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence.

Data analytics combines human judgment and statistics to analyze data in various
combinations in order to draw conclusions. The complexity of data analytics can range from
very simple (e.g., the number of payments interdicted by geography) to very complex (e.g., the
number of payments interdicted by geography, the industry code, the sanctions regime, the
reviewing analysts, and the scenarios or attributes). Data analytics requires good data quality
and categorization.

Data visualization often accompanies good analytics and provides a visual representation of
the underlying data analytics or statistics in an accessible and easily understood manner. ASTs
frequently include data visualization tools to produce graphs, charts, and other graphic
designs. Data visualization may accompany and supplement management information systems
and reports. Additionally, strong analytics and visualization can be key components to strong
governance and oversight, keeping board members and senior officers informed of the status
and trends within the sanctions compliance program.

Within a sanctions compliance program, data analytics are also effective at creating networks
of related parties based on common data elements and linkage. As the quantity and quality of
data increase, data analytics and its usefulness generally improves, particularly when
comparing trends over time. However, if the data population is too small or has systemic
issues, such as poor country categorization, drawing conclusions from data analytics can be
dangerous.

Robotics Process Automation (RPA) is the use of software that is designed to mimic actions
that were predetermined by a human user. When applied to sanctions compliance, RPA is
straightforward and typically applied when conducting due diligence, whether at onboarding
or during an investigation. For example, if research is required on “John Smith,” and the firm
requires that analysts (1) search four online search engines (e.g., Google, Bing, Baidu, and
Yahoo); (2) use a set word string of “Terrorist OR Sanction OR Crime”; and (3) review the first
two pages from each search, RPA can automate and collate these search requirements into a
single record that an analyst can quickly access and review. Although RPA may not be able to
determine whether the returned results are relevant, it can allow a human to begin reviewing

CGSS Page 186
Version 1.531
the results much faster. RPA is best used to replace repetitive, defined tasks that do not rely on
human judgment.

Machine learning and artificial intelligence also have been applied to sanctions compliance,
although their use is currently very limited. Machine learning is a subset of artificial
intelligence. It builds on the necessary data quality of data analytics and begins taking into
account human feedback and advanced statistical modeling techniques to make decisions with
minimal human intervention. Machine learning concepts are being introduced in resolving
sanctions screening alerts.

Artificial intelligence (AI), and similarly predictive analytics, is the end goal of IT development.
Full AI within a sanctions compliance program would, at the very least, involve the end-to-end
resolution of potential matches, and possibly the necessary reporting. The industry is still a
long way away from full AI, and most technology providers promise significant reductions in
false positives rather than the elimination of false positives. AI also includes the ability to read
through optical character recognition (OCR) and analyze free-text fields for possible sanctions
violations, which is especially useful for trade finance transactions involving free-text
documents such as invoices, bills of lading, and letters of credit.

Although full Al is not currently feasible for sanctions compliance, a reasonable next step is
partial Al—that is, what small tasks can be replaced by AI? AI has made natural inroads into
sanctions screening software by enhancing country information, which is often incomplete,
inaccurate, or otherwise in need of enhancement. AI has also assisted in analyzing
unformatted text and screening it for red flags, identifying entity names, and returning
screening results on them.

Predictive analytics moves from the reactionary (e.g., identifying preexisting networks of
sanctioned individuals) to the proactive (e.g., identifying emerging threats and risks, such as
customers with sanctions exposure in their beneficial ownership that are connected to
additional high-risk entities that can increase that exposure). By analyzing large quantities of
data, firms seek to identify and manage threats before they can cause sanctions breaches.

All of these emerging technologies, especially the most sophisticated ones, depend on human
feedback to assist them in learning “right from wrong.” As such, they may incidentally encode
human fallacies, prejudices, and biases. Although regulators are generally receptive to the
exploration of these new technologies, practitioners must devote time and effort to clearly
explaining their design, use, implementation, limitations, and weaknesses.

TECHNOLOGY VENDORS

Within a sanctions compliance program, the third-party role of technology and technology
vendors has significantly increased in importance. The NYDFS Part 504 on Filtering Programs
(sanctions) highlighted their importance when it included, “The vendor selection process ifa
third-party vendor is used to acquire, install, implement, or test...the Filtering Program or any
aspect of it.” The reliance on technology solutions and the use of vendors should be based on
the firm’s risk assessment and understanding of its risk. For example, firms engaged in

CGSS Page 187
Version 1.531
international correspondent banking across the world must invest in more sophisticated ASTs
than firms with no nominal international exposure.

It is also important to assess the overall quality of the vendor support. ASTs are far from
perfect, and sanctions evaders are constantly adapting. Compliance professionals should
evaluate a vendor’s industry reputation for updating its software and meeting evolving client
needs. If a sanctions breach occurs because of an AST limitation in the software, the vendor
should be expected to evaluate the root cause and provide fixes to the software that will
prevent the same limitation from being exploited. Even ifa compliance breach occurs (e.g.,
processing a sanctioned transaction) because of an inherent system limitation in a vendor-
provided system (e.g., an algorithm that does not parse concatenated, or joined, words) the
liability remains with the firm. Risk ownership cannot be outsourced.

Regulatory Matters

 

Since its publication of the Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines, OFAC has identified
deficiencies in the designing, updating, and amending of screening systems as one of the 10
main root causes of apparent regulation violations.

This section on regulatory matters addresses these issues and describes the selection of
sanctions lists and the screening process, procedures, important controls, and tools.

Sanctions Lists

Sanctions lists are one of the tools financial institutions use as part of their sanctions due
diligence process to ensure sanctions compliance. There are many different sanctions lists, so
itis important for organizations to know what information they contain and how it relates to
their customers, including the customers’ owners, controllers, and counterparties, as well as
how the lists relate to the jurisdiction/geography of the institution’s business.

An institution should always use a combination ofa prescriptive and a risk-based approach
when selecting relevant sanctions lists. It should determine which lists are (1) mandatory (i.e.,
prescribed by law); (2) good to have; and (3) not relevant to its organization (i.e, risk-based).
It is important for an organization to review the lists it is checking on an ongoing basis, as its
needs can change over time as its business engages with new customers, develops new
products, enters new markets, or exits existing markets.

Screening is not simply a matter of verifying whether a customer is identified ona list. There is
more detail to examine. Sanctions lists and supplementary information can help an institution
determine whether its customer is linked to a sanctioned target as well. This allows an
institution to more fully understand and monitor its sanctions risk.

CGSS Page 188
Version 1.531
MANDATORY LISTS

Mandatory sanctions lists generally are supranational lists—such as those including targets
designated by the United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR)—which an
organization must screen its customers against. Depending on the country in which a business
is located and operates, local sanctions regimes may be required and would need to be
included within a firm’s sanctions compliance program.

Other mandatory lists include:

e EU lists, ifthe firm is in Europe

e US lists, due to the breadth and scope of the US sanctions jurisdiction
e Host country’s list

e Lists of the financial institution’s parent company’s country, if the firm is a branch or
subsidiary of an organization outside of the host country

e Lists of major jurisdictions with which the organization trades

e Lists of other neighboring countries, especially if the financial institution uses their
currency

Exceptions exist. For example, ifa bank is located in South Korea and never engages in trade
with South America, considering South American countries’ lists for inclusion may be overly
burdensome. Often sanctions authorities will provide a mailing list to which a firm may
subscribe.

SUPPLEMENTARY LISTS

Some countries maintain supplementary lists of people known to have evaded or attempted to
evade sanctions restrictions. Additionally, although not as transparent, OFAC has an internal
process for determining whether a person or entity should be added to the SDN list.
Sometimes this process is lengthy. In order to minimize sanctions risk exposure, organizations
should consider screening against names found in advisories and other reliable sources, such
as negative news, in an effort to get ahead of potential sanctions risk. For example, the OFAC
Advisory to the Maritime Petroleum Shipping Community is a list of vessels and joint ventures
that may merit screening against.

A subscription to a private database can bea very efficient way to screen customers against all
the major sanctions lists from countries around the world. These databases include
information related to politically exposed persons (PEPs) in case that status was not clear
prior to searching. If a firm does not purchase a subscription of this type, ata minimum, it
should make a list of the various country sanctions authorities and blacklist websites for
manual searching.

CGSS Page 189
Version 1.531
Blacklists, including EU autonomous sanctions and EU additions to UN sanctions, should be
reviewed at regular intervals to ensure ongoing monitoring. This process can be automated
via a subscription service or performed manually by regularly checking any updates.

The amount of additional research undertaken should be a risk-based decision. The financial
institution needs to ensure that it has taken sufficient measures to assess the risk. Employees
should follow their firm’s policy and use sound judgment.

IDENTIFIERS — INDIVIDUALS

Sanctions lists record different types of identifiers, or types of information about a sanctions
target, such as name, date of birth, jurisdiction, national identification number, entities with
which a target is linked, information about penalties imposed against a target, registered legal
address, and website URL. Identifiers apply to both individuals and legal entities.

The most common identifier is the name or names ofa sanctions target. Yet sanctions targets
are known to use false personal information in order to evade detection. They use name
variations, such as reversing the order of their first name and surname (e.g., John Smith
becomes Smith John), or removing letters so that they are spelled differently (e.g., Jon Smith).
Names written in another script, such as Cyrillic or Arabic, may use different spelling
variations adopted over time, or their translation into English could result in spelling
variations. It is important to recognize that just because there is a target match froma list
outside of the host country’s list, the activity should be evaluated but not necessarily be
blocked.

When a target is known to have used a different name or variations in its spelling, most
listings will identify all of these by using the letters AKA, or “also known as.” Some lists will
use the term “alias” instead of AKA. The names listed as AKAs can also include nicknames,
“noms-de-guerre,” stage names, and acronyms such as ISIS/ISIL. OFAC defines a weak alias, or
“weak AKA,” as a broad alias that could generate a number of false hits. These “weak AKAs”
might be useful in identifying SDN’s, particularly when a possible “hit” is accompanied by
other identifiers such as date of birth.

OFAC has identified deficiencies in sanctions screening software and filtering faults as one of
the 10 root causes of the failure of sanctions compliance programs to meet regulatory
requirements. Specifically, OFAC noted the following failures:

e Organizations did not update their sanctions screening software to incorporate updates to
the SDN list.

e The sectoral sanctions identifications (SSI) list did not include pertinent identifiers, such
as SWIFT Business Identifier Codes for designated, blocked, or sanctioned financial
institutions.

e Software did not account for alternative spellings of prohibited countries or parties,
particularly in instances in which the organization was domiciled or conducted business in

CGSS Page 190
Version 1.531
geographies that frequently utilized such alternative spellings (e.g., “Habana” instead of
“Havana,” “Kuba” instead of “Cuba,” and “Soudan” instead of “Sudan”).

Table 8 shows two extracts of listings from the OFAC SDN list and the EU consolidated list. In
the first listing, Mr. Al-Adnani is known by, or has used, 13 different names. The listing for Mr.
Allane also shows that he is known by different names.

Table 8: Lists-Target Parties—Individuals-Names

AL-ADNANI, Abu Mohamed AL ADNANI 1: ABOU 2: MOHAMED 3: n/a 4: n/a 5: n/a.

DOB: --/--/1977.
POB: Binnish, Syrian Arab Republic
a.k.a: (1) AL BINCHI, Tah (2) AL-ADNANI, Abu, Mohamed (3) AL-

ADNANI, Abu, Mohammed (4) AL-BANSHI, Taha (5) AL-
KHATAB, Abu, Baker (6) ALRAWI, Abou, Sadeq (7) ALRAWI,
Yaser, Khalaf, Nazzal (8) AL-RAWI, Abu, Sadek (9) AL-RAWI,
Yasser, Khalaf, Hussein, Nazal (10) AL-SHAMI, Abu-Mohammad,
al-Adnani (11) FALAH, Jaber, Taha (12) FALAHA, Taha, Sobhi
(13) IBRAHIM,Hajj (14) KHATTAB, Abou

Nationality: Iraqi.

ALLANE, Hacene (alias (a) Hassan the Old, (b) Al Sheikh Abdelhay, (c) Boulahia, (d) Abu al-Foutouh,
(e) Cheib Ahcéne).

Date of birth: 17.1.1941,

Place of birth: Médéa, Algeria.

Nationality: Algerian.

Other information: Reportedly killed on 16.4.2004 in northern Niger.

Another important identifier is jurisdiction—information concerning a target’s nationality,
place of birth, country of residence, and other jurisdiction connections. Targets can have
connections to more than one jurisdiction. For example, Table 9 is a further extract from the
listing for Mr. Al-Adnani. The jurisdiction identifiers show that he was born in Syria, but he
also identified himself as an Iraqi national. Mr. Al-Adnani is also known to have been in Iraq as
part of his role as the spokesperson for ISIS.

A target’s date of birth is also an identifier, although it is not considered to be a reliable source
of information for a number of reasons:

Table 9: Lists-Target Parties—Individuals—Jurisdiction

AL ADNANI 1: ABOU 2: MOHAMED 3: n/a 4: n/a 5: n/a.

DOB: --/--/1977

POB: Binnish, Syrian Arab Republic

a.k.a: (1) AL BINCHL, ...

Nationality: Iraqi

Other Information: Official spokesman of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),

listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QE.J.115.04), and emir of ISIL in

CGSS Page 191
Version 1.531
Syria,closely associated with Abu Mohammed al-Jawlani
(QI.317.13) and Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, listed as Ibrahim Awwad
Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai(QI.A.299.11). Date of birth is

approximate.
Listed on: 15/08/2014
Last Updated: 22/08/2014
Group ID: 13086

e Dates of birth are recorded in different formats. For example, 3/8/2010 in the United
States equates to March 8, but in the United Kingdom it equates to August 3.

e Some countries did not maintain official birth records in the past, so dates of birth can be
guesses or estimates.

e Some countries did not include birth information on identification cards, which area
commonly relied upon source of government-verified information.

e Targets have been known to use fictitious birth date information.

Additional identifiers include passports and national identification numbers, which are
typically issued as part ofa national identification card.

In the example shown in Table 10, the individual holds a Yemeni passport and was issued a
national identification number by the authorities in Saudi Arabia. This information is
considered to be reliable because it typically originates from government authorities who
have verified an individual’s identity before issuing the passport. This information can prove
very useful, especially when collected as part of customer due diligence. The identification
number issued by some countries also indicates the region from which the individual came,
along with their date of birth.

Table 10: Lists-Target Parties—-Individuals—Passport/National Identificatlon Number

Name: AL-RUMAYSH: MU’TASSIM: YAHYA: ‘ALI

DOB: 04/01/1973.

POB: Jedah, Saudi Arabia

a.k.a: AL-JEDDAWI, Abu-Rayhanah, al-Ansari

Nationality: Yemeni

Passport Details: Passport No: 01055336 (Yemeni passport) National

Identification no: Saudi Arabian alien registration
no.2054275397, issued on 22.07.1998
Other Information: Also referred to as: Rayhanah, Abu-Rayhanah and Handalah.

Yet another identifier includes the names of any entities or individuals with whom a target has
been associated or linked. Examples of this type of identifier include:

e Political parties
e Position held within militia or insurgent group

CGSS Page 192
Version 1.531
e Executive position or directorship

e Commercial activities

e Associations or activities with SDNs

For example, in Table 11, the list shows that Mr. Al-Adnani is known to be involved with ISIS in

Iraq as its official spokesperson. The listing also identifies a number of individuals with whom
he is known to be associated.

Table 11: Lists-Target Parties—Individuals—Associations and Linkages

Name: AL ADNANI 1: ...
Nationality: Iraqi
Other Information: Official spokesman of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),

listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QE.J.115.04), and emir of ISIL in Syria,
closely associated with Abu Mohammed al-Jawlani (QI.317.13)
and Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, listed as Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali
al-Badri al-Samarrai (QI.A.299.11).

Listed on: 15/08/2014
Last Updated: 22/08/2014
Group ID: 13086

One additional identifier is information about other sanctions or penalties imposed against a
target. As shown in the listing extract in Table 12, Mr. Alouche was deported by the German
authorities. Under “other information,” there is a reference to the fact that Mr. Alouche was
first placed ona sanctions list by the United Nations. Information about Mr. Alouche on the UN
website reveals more about what happened in Germany: Mr. Alouche was deported because
he was known to have links to Al-Qaeda cells in Germany operated by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi,
the Jordanian-born militant who operated a paramilitary training camp in Afghanistan and
who was thought to have been behind numerous terrorist attacks.

Table 12: Lists-Target Parties—Individuals—Other Government “Sanctions”

Name: ALOUCHE: ISAM: ALI: MOHAMED
DOB: (1) 21/03/1974. (2) --/--/1972.
POB: Baghdad, Iraq
a.k.a: THAER, Mansour
Nationality: Jordanian
Other Information: UN Ref QI.T.76.02. Was deported from Germany to Jordan in Feb
2005.
Name: KAKWAVU BUKANDE 1: JEROME 2: n/a 3: n/a 4: n/a 5: n/a.
Title: General POB: Goma
aka: (1) COMMANDANT JEROME (2) AKWAVU, Jerome
Nationality: Congolese
CGSS Page 193

Version 1.531
Other Information: Former General in FARDC, Given the rank in December 2014.
Former President of UCD/FAPC. Detained in Makala Prison in
Kinshasa (as at June 2011). Convicted in November 2014 by the
DRC military to 10 years in prison.

Listed on: 02/11/2005
Last Updated: 09/03/2017
Group ID: 8707

IDENTIFIERS — LEGAL ENTITIES

Legal entities—that is, legal persons and legal arrangements, such as corporations,
partnerships, trusts, foundations, and similar types of structures—can also be listed as targets.
One example is parties who are suspected of posing a high risk of breaching trade restrictions
because they have been previously denied exporting privileges.

OFAC publishes a list of foreign individuals and entities determined to have violated,
attempted to violate, conspired to violate, or caused a violation of US sanctions on Syria or
Iran, pursuant to Executive Order 13608. It also lists foreign persons who have facilitated
deceptive transactions for or on behalf of persons subject to US sanctions. Collectively, such
individuals and companies are called foreign sanctions evaders (FSEs), and transactions by US
persons or within the United States involving FSEs are prohibited. The FSE list is not part of
the SDN list; however, individuals and companies on the FSE list may also appear on the SDN
list.

Other lists identify parties in whom businesses cannot invest.

The listing of legal entities can include common identifiers such as:
e Registered or corporation name and registration number

e Registered or legal address or any known operating address

e Jurisdiction associated with the entity and/or its activities

e Names of associated entities or individuals

e Website, email, telephone, and fax details

e Other details

The listing example shown in Table 13 comes from the OFAC list of SDNs. Here, the
jurisdiction identifier shows that the legal entity is connected to Vancouver, Canada, and the
United Kingdom. (Remember, some targets are not situated in sanctioned countries.) The list
includes other identifiers as well, such as the names the company is known by, its addresses,
and registration and license numbers. In terms of associated entities, the listing identifies that
this company is linked to the PACNET Group.

CGSS Page 194
Version 1.531
Table 13: Lists-Target Parties—Legal Entities-Identifiers

Name: PACIFIC NETWORK SERVICES LTD. (a.k.a. PACNET AMERICAS;
a.k.a. PACNET CANADA; a.k.a. PACNET SERVICES AMERICAS
LTD.; a.k.a. PACNET SERVICES LTD.)

Address: Fourth Floor, 595 Howe St, Vancouver, BC V6C 2T5, Canada;
Parkshot House, 5 Kew Road, Richmond, Surrey, England TW9
2PR, United Kingdom;

Registration ID M08842780 (Canada)
Company Number BC0469083 (Canada)
License 15128950 (Canada) [TCO]
Linked To: PACNET GROUP

By searching the OFAC SDN list, it can be determined that this group is an international
payments processor and money services business, with a history of money laundering,
including mail fraud schemes that targeted victims in the United States and throughout the
world.

Sometimes a listing will include information about the activities undertaken by a legal entity,
as shown in Table 14. The extract from this listing shows that Ocean Maritime Management
Company Limited operated a vessel called the Chong Chon Gang. The company used the vessel
to ship weapons to North Korea.

Table 14: Lists-Target Parties—Legal Entities-Other Details

Name: OCEAN MARITIME MANAGEMENT COMPANY, LIMITED (OMM)
aka.: na

F.ka.: na

Listed on: 28 Jul. 2014

Other information: Ocean Maritime Management Company, Limited is the

operator/manager of the vessel Chong Chon Gang. It played a
key role in arranging the shipment of concealed cargo of arms
and related materiel from Cuba to the DPRK in July 2013. As
such, Ocean Maritime Management Company, Limited
contributed to activities prohibited by the resolutions, namely
the arms embargo imposed by Resolution 1718 (2006), as
modified by Resolution 1874 (2009), and contributed to the
evasion of the measures imposed by these resolutions.

The key individuals involved in an entity’s ownership, control, and operation are also
identifiers, although the extent to which listings for legal entities actually cross reference or
identify these individuals can vary. Examples include beneficial owners, controllers,
executives, and directors.

In the extract from an OFAC list in Table 15, the listing for Indian River (UK) Limited does not
refer to the individuals who own or control the company. However, these individuals could be

CGSS Page 195
Version 1.531
subject to sanctions restrictions. A further search of the list reveals that an individual named
Ruth Ferlow is connected to the company. According to the OFAC website, Ms. Ferlow was the
director, manager, and company secretary of Indian River, along with several other PACNET-
linked companies. This example highlights the importance of doing separate screening of both
legal entities and the individuals who may own or control them.

Table 15: Lists-Target Parties—Legal Entities

Name: INDIAN RIVER (UK) LTD., D11 Glyme Court, Oxford Office
Village, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxon
OX5 1LQ, United Kingdom; Company Number 07927999 (United
Kingdom) [TCO] (Linked To: PACNET
CONNECTIONS LIMITED; Linked To: PACNET GROUP).
FERLOW, Ruth (a.k.a. FERLOW, Ruth Hilda Rose), D11 Glyme
Court, Oxford Office Village, Langford Lane,
Kidlington, Oxon OX5 1LQ, United Kingdom; 4910 Keith Road,
Vancouver, BC V7W 2NI, Canada; 4th Floor,
595 Howe Street, Vancouver, BC V6C 2TF, Canada; DOB 05 Jan
1967; nationality Canada (individual)
[TCO] (Linked To: PACNET SERVICES LTD;

Linked To: CHEXX INC;
Linked To: INDIAN RIVER (UK) LTD.;
Linked To: PACNET GROUP

UPDATING SANCTIONS LISTS

Lists are constantly changing, sometimes daily. Because restrictions must be enforced
immediately upon their introduction, it is crucial for financial institutions to stay current with
the political climate and monitor lists frequently to ensure that they align with the firm’s
sanctions policy. It is helpful to monitor government websites through subscriptions, create
tailored news alerts, follow applicable periodicals, such as the ACAMS newsletter
moneylaundering.com, and to require vendors to immediately provide updated lists.

CASE EXAMPLE: OLEG DERIPASKA, 2019

CASE SUMMARY

The Russian billionaire Oleg Deripaska was designated under US sanctions in April 2018. He
sued the US Department of the Treasury in March 2019 to be delisted, claiming that the basis
on which he was placed on the list was a result of “filthy lies.” The Treasury alleged that, in
Russia, Deripaska supported Russian president Vladimir Putin and his projects in the energy
sector. In response, the Treasury released (with redactions) a 161-page evidentiary
memorandum laying out the case as to why Deripaska merited inclusion on the sanctions list.
The memo cites media reports, Deripaska’s website, company prospectus, and other records.

CGSS Page 196
Version 1.531
Although a sanctions actor can challenge a designation through an administrative process, to
be removed from the US treasury list, the actor must submit evidence to support his or her
removal. In the past, Deripaska had been successful in getting companies that he controlled,
such as En+ Group PLC, to agree to decrease his control in the company and add Americans
and Europeans to the boards of directors. However, he has been unsuccessful in getting
himself removed from the list. The inability to remove a company from a sanctions list can
result in the failure of the company. 117

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Being delisted from a sanctions list often requires evidence of a change in behavior, such
as changes to an organization’s overall governance structure.

> Sanctions can result in companies facing financial challenges due to the trade restrictions.

> AnSDN-controlled entity that was formerly listed can be delisted. It is important to note
that this does not automatically mean that the SDN himself/herself has been delisted.

The Screening Process, Procedures, Important
Controls, and Tools

As shown in Figure 19, the basic screening process flows in this way: Customer data and/or
payment messages flow into the AST, where the information is screened against sanctions
lists. Depending on how it’s configured, an AST will compare every word ofa payment
message against sanctions lists and check names and geographic information, such as
countries under embargo, and perform string matching for BIC codes and passport numbers.
The AST gets feedback from the sanctions lists and produces a screening result.

 

117 “Legal Filing in Deripaska Case Provides Rare Insight Into Supporting Evidence on Designation,”
Kharon Brief, June 3, 2019.

CGSS Page 197
Version 1.531
Figure 19: How Screening Works

 

fe 4% 4b

Customer data, payment messages AST (Sanctions lists) Screening results

 

String matching, also referred to as pattern matching, is one of many algorithms for efficient
searching that involves finding occurrence(s) ofa pattern string within another string or body
of text. This method can be used to recognize passport numbers, national ID numbers,
telephone numbers, zip codes, postal codes, and any other information that follows a specific
pattern. It is also useful for looking for information that follows leading text, such as “Name:”
and extracting the text that comes after it. Another use is in reprocessing documents; for
example, extracting a piece of information such as the date from a file name and entering it in
a field. Pattern matching works by “reading” through text strings to match patterns.

An AST’s filter engine retains potential matches between customer data and payment
messages that contain enough information to match an algorithm or scenario. Then it applies a
weighting, threshold, or other matching criteria to show how close the potential match is to an
algorithm or scenario. As noted previously, it is important to set thresholds correctly.

A hit, potential match, or name match, is when the screening process indicates a possible
sanctioned person. An analyst’s review (or investigation) of the underlying hits within an alert
will determine the meaningfulness of the hits. An individual’s review ofa hit will result in one
of the following outcomes:

1. Atarget match—when the review concludes that the party identified is in fact the same as
the one named ona sanctions list (also referred to as a true match)

2. Escalate to a case investigation—generally enough information will not be present to
initially determine whether a hit is a target match; therefore, escalation to a case
investigation is required to conduct additional due diligence and research

3. A false positive—not a match to a target named ona sanctions list
4. A false negative—the hit is dismissed, but is in fact a match to a target named ona

sanctions list

When all of the underlying hits have been resolved, an alert can be given a final disposition of
(1) target match; (2) escalate; or (3) false positive. An analyst should never intentionally

CGSS Page 198
Version 1.531
make the disposition of false negative, as this term is reserved for situations in which an
analyst makes an error that results in a sanctioned target not being identified.

MANAGING ALERTS

It can be extremely challenging for a financial institution to manage the volume of hits and
alerts generated by an AST. Each organization has its own internal processes for its AST that
outline how hits should be assessed and managed, and how decisions should be made and
documented. The following is a high-level overview of the common strategies used by some
organizations to manage alert volumes.

One strategy is to calibrate the threshold used by the AST for matches so that it only generates
alerts that are very similar to the information ona sanctions list. For example, a firm could
limit their reviews to when screening results show a 90% or more likely match to a sanctions
target. Although this strategy would reduce the number of hits to review, it is not acceptable.
Regulators object to the application of this strategy solely to reduce the number of hits
without also considering the impact of effectively identifying possible sanctions risks.

Another strategy for handling a high volume of hits and alerts is the use of “whitelists,” also
known as “good guy lists” and “false hit lists.” Whitelists include individuals and entities
whose characteristics trigger a hit or alert by the AST, but who are found not to bea matchtoa
sanctions list. Some ASTs allow users to attach supplementary information that supports the
conclusion that this person or entity is not a sanctions target and warrants inclusion on the
whitelist.

Many regulators seek proof that whitelists or suppression/exemptions lists are routinely
subjected to screening against new names added to sanctions list and that there are
procedures in place to ensure controls over whitelist entries.

Firms should also maintain internal blacklists for purposes of sanctions. A blacklist is an
internal list of names (including places, persons, entities, and individuals) that are screened to
identify any sanctions exposure, in addition to government and vendor-maintained sanctions
lists. Other potential additions to a firm’s internal blacklist may come from OFAC advisories
and other warnings that list entities that did not merit being placed on the SDN list, but are
still considered high risk. Internal list entries may also come from media reporting of reported
sanctions evasion and reports issued by bodies such as the United Nations.

“Warning notices” are notices of entities or other known sanctioned risks that firms should
take into account. They are issued by financial authorities and supervisors (e.g., BaFin,
Financial Conduct Authority [FCA], and the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority
[FINMA]) and can include:

e “Wanted” lists from police departments, governments, and national and international
investigation authorities (e.g., Interpol, Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI], and Drug
Enforcement Administration [DEA])

e Lists from international tribunals

CGSS Page 199
Version 1.531
e Enforcement actions

e Disqualified directors and debarred companies from governmental and international
agencies

e FATF’s list of high-risk and monitored jurisdictions

e The EU’s list of tax havens and high-risk countries

Some vendors may offer a “one-stop shop” where an organization can run searches against
various lists simultaneously.

Another strategy for managing the volume of hits and alerts is to create more specific
scenarios and rules. The more specific an institution is about the typologies and scenarios that
need to be screened, the more efficient the AST will be in generating alerts.

An organization can also be more selective about the lists screened based on the sanctions risk
assessment. There can be a large number of potential sanctions lists to screen against;
however, screening against every list available may generate an unwieldy number of false
positives, especially when a target is included on more than one list. Therefore, institutions
should ensure that the lists they screen against are based on the results of the organization’s
sanctions risk assessment.

If the AST is generating excessive duplicate alerts across different lists, it may be appropriate
to examine which lists are the most relevant and complete. In fact, some vendors provide a
consolidated list.

There are additional strategies to help overcome the specific challenges of payment screening,
with the caveat that institutions must always follow internal procedures for clearing hits. As a
general practice, flagged transactions can be stopped and put into a pending queue while they
are being checked and verified. Also, decision trees can help analysts evaluate each hit. Some
ASTs highlight the keywords in the database, payment message, or sanctions list that
generated the hit.

Junk data, or nonsensical data, added to a payment message could be an indication of wire
stripping. For example, ifa bank blocks a payment or returns it for compliance reasons, how
does the bank know that the originating bank will not alter the original payment message and
re-submit it? Some ASTs keep records of the data from blocked or returned payments and
reference it when examining new payments messages. If a new message has a high degree of
similarity to content from a previous blocked or returned one, it triggers a hit as a possible
“wire stripping” attempt.

Customer Screening with Higher Thresholds (Static Data) vs. Screening of
Unstructured Data

Firms can use two different ASTs for their real-time payment messages and their static
customer data. Even if they do not use different base ASTs, they may use different thresholds

CGSS Page 200
Version 1.531
because the screening of real-time payment messages can contain unstructured data in the
form ofa “purpose of payment.” In addition, the messages can contain names and places with
typographical errors and other mistakes because they were entered and sent from an outside
institution.

Compare this situation to static customer data in which dual controls are in place to ensure
that one person enters the name correctly and the other person checks it for accuracy. As a
general rule, firms tend to have higher data quality that is verified against legal documents for
their customers than for the counterparties. For this reason, when screening static data, the
thresholds may be higher because the data quality is higher.

Vendor Screening

Financial institutions and other obliged entities should also have controls in place to screen
their vendors. For financial institutions, this may be part of their vendor risk management
program. The screening of vendors should involve determining the ultimate beneficial owner
(UBO) and ascertaining the vendor’s ownership structure, similar to customer due diligence
requirements. This might be termed Know Your Vendor.

Management Information Systems and Reports

Firms, especially financial institutions, should have robust management information systems
(MIS) to keep the board of directors and senior management informed of key risk indicators
and processes. The board of directors and senior management are ultimately accountable for
the success or failure of the sanctions compliance program. MIS can enable them to track
issues and determine whether additional resources or responses are required. One metric
may be the number of sanctions trainings conducted (or absences from training), the volume
of wires processed, and the percentage of wires being investigated. By working with
management to develop meaningful MIS, they can make better strategic decisions and apply
additional controls proactively.

Additional Monitoring and Controls

There are some additional controls that can be used to mitigate sanctions risks. The first is
ongoing monitoring and event-triggered monitoring of customers and third parties. This
would include monitoring for AML purposes, which may lead to a sanctions investigation.
Effective ongoing monitoring measures also must take into account the frequently changing
nature of sanctions restrictions and the targets to which they apply. These measures can help
a business discover emerging sanctions threats in its customer population. For example, by
monitoring a customer’s beneficial ownership, a business can identify whether a beneficial
owner has become sanctioned and the risk that poses to the customers. Based on this

CGSS Page 201
Version 1.531
information, it can place additional controls on the relationship, such as escalations and
additional approvals, to prevent transactions from occurring that may result in sanctions
violations. As a best practice, a business should incorporate updates to sanctions listings into
its screening activities within 24 to 48 hours. During that 24 to 48 hours, ifa business
continues to engage in activity, it should review those transactions not screened with the most
updated information. If any sanctioned activity was processed, businesses should report and
disclose that activity to regulators.

Event-triggered monitoring is an internal control used to mitigate sanctions risks. It occurs
whenever relevant information about an existing customer (e.g,, its jurisdiction of operation)
changes, therefore requiring an interim review of information prior to a scheduled review.

An effective sanctions monitoring program incorporates these two types of monitoring to
ensure that any changes to sanctions lists or customers are identified and handled ina timely
way.

Another control is the “four eyes” or “second pair of eyes” principle. This principle is often
applied when sanctions screening identifies a possible match between a customer and a name
ona sanctions list. One staff member will conduct the initial review, and a second person will
review the work performed to verify its accuracy.

Another control involves the use of clauses or contract wording that warrants that the party
signing does not perform work with sanctions targets or countries, and that they will maintain
an effective sanctions compliance program. These provisions normally allow the business to
exit the relationship, without penalty, if it is discovered that the party is, in fact, a sanctions
target or has violated a sanctions restriction.

These controls, however, can be of limited effect. Recall that it is not possible to transfer
liability for sanctions compliance to others. In addition, some countries have laws preventing
reliance on these types of clauses, as they are considered to act as a boycott, which is illegal.

An organization must monitor continually, so it is aware of changes to ownership and can
ensure that owners are screened against relevant sanctions lists in a timely manner.

CGSS Page 202
Version 1.531
Name Screening

 

Figure 20 shows OFAC’s recommended process for name screening, which applies an
assessment technique described as a process of elimination.

Figure 20: Name Screening

Js the customer hiting against OFA's SDN list or target or targeted countries?

<a

| the customer an individual while the name of the SDN list is a vessel, organization or company (or vice -verea)?

NO.

YES

Not a valid match

Js only one of tha names (Le. only tha given ar family name) matching?
YES

Compare the complete SDN entry with all of the information you have on the matching customer. Are there a number of
sinbarttios or exactm  abches? NO

a

Escalate the customer for the further review

It is important to remember that the goal when assessing hits is to verify whether the
customer or supplier is the same party identified on a sanctions list. The financial institution
should already have collected information about the customer or supplier, and that
information should be referenced first to determine whether the hit is a true match. In
addition, internet research can be undertaken—and supplemented with other publicly
available information—in order to confirm whether the person identified by a name screening
is the same person as the customer.

Naming Conventions

Naming conventions are an important aspect of sanctions name screening. Naming
conventions are the various ways an individual’s names are given to or used by them. Names
can be presented in many ways, largely dependent upon the country or cultural norms of the
country where the individual was born or raised. Table 16 presents examples of different
ways in which names can be presented.

CGSS Page 203
Version 1.531
Table 16: Sanctions Name Screening - Naming Conventions

 

 

 

Country First name Surname
Russia Ivan plus father’s first name Malkovitch
Ivan Boris Malkovitch Ivan that becomes a patronymic Putin (male); Putina (female)
Putin (Borisovich (Borisovych)/
Borisovna) Ivan
Spanish Countries Julio Raul Antonio - Arbo (Father’s
Julio Raul Antonio-Arbo Might only use one of these surname) Garcias-Iglesias
Garcias-Iglesias names (Mother’s surname) Might only

use father’s surname

 

 

 

 

It is clear from these examples that names are not necessarily recorded in the order of first
name, middle name, and surname. An organization should consider these variations when
assessing possible hits identified during the screening process.

Transliteration

Transliteration is the conversion of text from one script into another, for example, a document
written in Arabic characters that is converted into Cyrillic script. This phenomenon can
present a name screening challenge. It is important to recognize the cultural complexity of
names and how they affect sanctions screening. There can be many different English spellings
of the name “Mohammed,” for example, Mohamed, Muhammed, and Muhamid.

Romanization

Romanization refers to the process of taking a different writing system (i.e., one that often
does not use the Latin A-Z alphabet) and converting it into Latin script—that is, converting
writing into the script that languages, such as English, are written in today. The challenge
arises when scripts do not have equivalent letters or symbols. As a result, there can be
variations in the spelling of names and words, even when they’re written in the standard
alphabet, depending upon how they have been transliterated.

CGSS Page 204
Version 1.531

 
Payment Screening

 

Payment screening is the screening or filtering of relevant payment instructions prior to their
execution in order to prevent making funds available in breach of sanctions, embargoes, and
other measures. This type of screening activity focuses upon transaction messages. Each
organization has its own process and standards of how sanctions payment screening is
undertaken.

Sources

Generally, payment screening tools monitor payments systems and communication protocols,
such as:

e The Clearing House Interbank Payments System (CHIPS)

e Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) credit transfer

e The Federal Reserve’s Fedwire

e The Society for the Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications Code (SWIFT)
e Regional systems (e.g., the Large Value Transfer System in Canada)

e Other payment ecosystems (e.g., PayPal)

Each of these payment systems has its own protocols concerning data, information, and
templates for payments. A financial institution can accept and use more than one of these
payment systems.

SWIFT Messages

SWIFT is the most well-known provider of financial messaging services. SWIFT messages have
a predefined, structured format with set fields. Some fields can only contain specific values,
numbers, etc., and others allow for the entry of free text.

SWIFT messages are predefined in two ways. First, SWIFT has developed a set of formats for
messages based on the type of commercial activity involved, as shown in Table 17.

Table 17: SPS-SWIFT Messages

 

 

 

 

 

Message Type Description
MTOxx System Messages
CGSS Page 205

Version 1.531

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MT1xx Customer Payments and Cheques

MT2xx Financial Institution Transfers

MT3xx Treasury Markets

MT4xx Collection and Cash Letters

MT5xx Securities Markets

MT6xx Treasury Markets - Metals and Syndications
MT7xx Documentary Credits and Guarantees
MT8xx Travelers Checks

MT9xx Cash Management and Customer Status

 

 

 

 

The key to the formats is the first number that follows “MT.” For example, a SWIFT message
with the format MT500 is a transaction related to securities markets. Every message type
contains required and optional fields with the information inserted either manually by
operator or in an automated way by an institution.

Second, SWIFT messages are designed with predefined fields. Table 18 shows a simplified
summary of the numbers for those fields ina SWIFT message and the information that should
be entered into that field.

Table 18: SPS-SWIFT Messages-MT103 Fields

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Field Field Name

:20 Transaction Reference Number

:23B Bank Operation Code

:32A Value Data / Currency /Interbank Settled
:33B Currency / Original Ordered Amount

:50A, F or K Ordering Customer (Payer)

:52A or D Ordering Institution (Payer’s Bank)

:53A, Bor D Sender’s Correspondent (Bank)

:54A, Bor D Receiver’s Correspondent (Bank)

:56A, C or D Intermediary (Bank)

:57A, B, Cor D Account with Institution (Beneficiary’s Bank)
:59 or 594 Beneficiary

:70 Remittance Information (Payment Reference)
‘71A Details of Charges (BEN / OUR / SHA)

:72 Sender to Receiver Information

:77B Regulatory Reporting

 

MT103 messages typically are used for wire transfer payments. Refer to the example in Table
19:

e Field 20, together with a date, is a helpful way to locate SWIFT messages.
e Field 23 can determine whether certain sanctions apply. If US dollars were used, US

sanctions restrictions would apply.

CGSS Page 206
Version 1.531

 
e Fields 50 and 59 contain information about the sending and receiving parties. These fields
must contain a set of minimum information required by the EU regulation on wire

transfers and FATF Recommendation 16.

e Field 70 contains remittance information that is a free text field. This field and any other
free text fields can be used to provide additional information about a payment.

Table 19: SPS-SWIFT Messages-MT103 Example

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Field Subject Description

20 Unique Reference No. Used for tracking transaction

23 Value Date and Payment Value date of payment, currency involved & the amount
“GBP1000,11” vs. GBBP1000,11

50 Sending Party (payer) Required information to identify sender to comply with

59 Recipient FATF R.16 / EU Reg. on Wire Transfers 2015/847

70, 72 Payment Description Free text field

 

Certain fields in a SWIFT payment message tend to be the most relevant for screening, such as
the ordering customer, beneficiary, and message details fields, which need to be screened
against all relevant sanctions lists. In the example shown in Table 20, hits are likely to be
generated by field 50, where the AST has identified the word “CUBA". It is part of the sender’s
address in Panama.

Table 20: SPS-SWIFT MT103

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Field | Field Name Example Explanation
:20 Transaction Reference 123456789191
Number
:23B Bank Operation Code CRED
:32A Date/Currency/Interbank | 180202USD25001,21
Settled Amount
:33B Currency/Original USD25001,21
Ordered Amount
550A Ordering Customer 00012345678912 False positive OFAC hit on
or SENOR JOHN DOE Avenida Cuba which is an
50K AVENIDA CUBA Y CALLE 38 avenue in Panama City and
ESTE NUMERO 38-29 doesn’t represent the
POSTAL 0831-00947 PAITILLA, | country of Cuba.
PANAMA, PANAMA Sometimes tools can
address this through
inequivalence matching
functionality.

 

In another example, Table 21, a hit was detected in Field 52, which shows the sending bank’s
SWIFT or BIC code. The AST noted that this code was designated to a bank called BANCO DE

CGSS

Version 1.531

Page 207

 

 
CREDITO Y COMERCIO, located in Havana, Cuba. The AST could be set to identify that the fifth
and sixth character of the SWIFT code represents a country, and in this case CU is CUBA.
Instead of a SWIFT code, a bank’s name and address might generate a red flag. For example,
field 57 is used to identify correspondent banks used along the payment chain. If the SWIFT
code for CITIBANK is CITIUS33, the AST will not generate a hit.

Table 21: SPS-SWIFT MT103

 

 

Field Field Name Example Explanation
Tag
552A Ordering Institution BDCRCUHH BANCO DE CREDITO Y COMERCIO is a

bank located in Havana Cuba. The first
4 characters of a SWIFT code is the
bank identifier and the 5th and 6th
characters are the country code which
is CU for Cuba in this case.

 

 

 

:53B Sender’s CITIUS33
Correspondent

556A Intermediary MRMDUS33

557A Account with EBILAED

Institution or

 

 

 

 

 

 

In another example, Table 22, field 59 lists an exchange house as the beneficial owner.
However, field 72 identifies the real beneficiary as Joquin Loera. This is one technique used to
conceal the true beneficial owner. It is helpful to look for words such as “further credit to” or
“for the benefit of” in field 72. In correspondent banking, this is an example of nesting. In this
example, the drug kingpin Joaquin Guzman Loera (“El Chapo”) is named in field 72. His name
is only missing the “A” in Joaquin. Some algorithms would likely have detected this variation in
spelling and identified this message as a strong hit by an AST.

Table 22: SPS-SWIFT MT103

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Field Tag | Field Name Example Explanation

59 Beneficiary 12345678901 Exchange House but not the real

or UAE Exchange beneficiary!

559A House 123, Inc 123
Random St Dubai,
UAE

:70 Remittance RFB/INVOICE

Information 5555555
‘71A Details of Charges SHA
CGSS Page 208

Version 1.531
 

:72 Sender to Receiver FOR BENEFIT OF Key indicator words: , further credit to,
Information JOQUIN GUZMAN for benefit of etc.

LOERA Attempts to conceal name through
spelling variations name

“JOAQUIN GUZMAN LOERA”, the
infamous drug kingpin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Although it is important to screen all payment messages, some messages carry elevated levels
of sanctions risks. For example, the MT500 message series needs careful consideration,
especially in relation to sectoral sanctions restrictions. For example, if an instrument issued by
Sberbank, a named SSI, was referenced inan MT500 message, the message would need to be
reviewed to verify whether it involved financial instruments restricted under the sectoral
sanctions.

When a hit is generated, a manual review must be undertaken of both the payment message
and supplementary documentation to verify whether the restrictions apply and the
transaction should be halted.

Challenges

Using an AST for payment screening can create some challenges when third parties complete
payment messages. These include:

e Entry of information in the incorrect field

e = =Entry of incorrect information

e Use of abbreviations or symbols

e Incomplete words

To ensure that an AST picks up both blank fields and fields that are filled with “junk” (random

symbols or words to populate a field), some ASTs support equivalence and non-equivalence
algorithms for fuzzy matching.

TOLL GATES

The information that forms a part of a payment message can change as it passes through the
various parties that form the payment chain; these parties can be described as toll gates
(Figure 21).

CGSS Page 209
Version 1.531
Figure 21: Toll Gates Example

SUDAN fol 0} 57,5

Cuban Bank

Ce dent
orrespondent en

a
INES

PUR eke seh met). -)

   

eae ly

Respondent
Byers

oh Tag $1,000,000

Correspondent Other bank
Sudanese Bank

Respondent pr
$1,000,000

 

i

  

Occasionally, information in payment messages varies or is omitted due to human error,
inexperience, or simply variations in a description. As the payment moves through the toll
gates, the information might be changed, resulting in an incomplete picture of the sanctions
risks involved.

For this reason, payment screening tends to have looser parameter weights and thresholds
when compared with name screening based on various data quality and availability issues.

DATA TRANSFER

The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) rule 31 [31 CFR 103.33(g)|—often called the “Travel Rule’—
requires all financial institutions to pass on specific information to the next financial
institution in the payment chain for certain fund transmittals that involve more than one
financial institution. This issue—how data travels through an institution—is another risk for
banks to monitor. The fundamental risk is the quality of payment information received from
other banks.

One way to monitor the quality of the information is to check the messages at the bank level
and determine if any banks have low-quality data compared with their peers. If recurring
patterns occur, e.g., names appear to be truncated, then the institution may not be passing all
of the data to the next bank. This deficiency hampers an AST’s ability to screen names
effectively. The Travel Rule requires the transmitting institution to include the following
information ina transmittal order:

e Name ofthe transmitter, and, ifthe payment is ordered from an account, the account
number of the transmitter

e Address of the transmitter

e Amount ofthe transmittal order

CGSS Page 210
Version 1.531
e Date of the transmittal order

e Identity of the recipient’s financial institution

e As many ofthe following items as are received with the transmittal order:
- Name and address of the recipient
- Account number ofthe recipient
- Any other specific identifier of the recipient

e Either the name and address or the numerical identifier of the transmitter’s financial
institution!!8

Intermediary financial institutions are expected to pass on any of the above information they
received to other financial institutions in the message chain. It is important to note that while
the Travel Rule only applies to funds transmittals of $3,000 USD or more, sanctions apply to all
transactions regardless of the value.

In addition, FATF Recommendation 16 specifies the need for financial institutions to provide
information about the originator of a payment as well as the beneficiary. Under this
recommendation, banks have a more explicit obligation to monitor the quality of data in the
transactions they receive.

Solving Name and Payment Screening Challenges

To help overcome the challenges posed by naming conventions, transliteration, and
romanization, screening analysts should receive name matching training on the cultural
diversity of global names, especially those more relevant to the firm’s geographical footprint.
For example, an analyst working for a Chinese bank will need to understand Chinese naming
conventions. Analysts can also help by providing feedback from their analysis of hits involving
convention or transliteration issues. This feedback can then be used to build equivalence and
synonyms lists as they recognize potential matches.

Regular testing using “mocked up” examples can help to verify whether the models or
scenarios used fail to flag possible sanctions targets based on how a name is presented or
transliterated. Mocked-up examples use names taken from a sanctions list that are known to
produce a hit and modify them using known typologies, such as glued names, reversed letters,
dropped letters, and transliteration. These mocked-up names are then screened in a firm’s test
environment to determine the thresholds at which they produce a hit. The firm can then
determine appropriate thresholds based on its risk appetite. Ifa name is too “mocked up” (e.g.,
Osama bin Laden modified to Oscar Bill Ladin), it may not be effective to set a threshold based

 

118 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, BsA/AML Examination Manual, 2014.

CGSS Page 211
Version 1.531
on that hit. Although ASTs are important, underlying human judgment and experience are still
necessary to ensure proper calibration.

Most screening tools support some form ofa “nickname” or equivalence (e.g., “Bill” as a
common nickname for “William”). Hence, “Bill” and “William” should be considered equivalent
in the screening tool. Similarly, the various methods used to romanize the same symbol need
to be considered equivalent (e.g., “Mr. Ng” and “Mr. Wu”). An internal list that identifies
equivalencies can be a good way to prevent this problem from reoccurring.

Yet multiple variations of a name can increase the number of hits generated by an AST. One
way to avoid this problem is to use a culturally diverse name parser to split out each part of
the name. In fact, this function is available with many ASTs. Names that are broken into
discrete parts tend to perform better in the matching algorithms and can reduce the amount of
noise and the number of false positives. For example, if a payment message included the name
William Butler Yeats, instead of the name simply mapping to a “name” field, it could
potentially be parsed into first = William, middle = Butler, and last = Yeats.

Another potential data point setting for an AST is the country information from the address
field. Rather than simply looking at the name on its own, the AST would calculate the
likelihood of a name match by also screening “country.” If the AST is screening a payment
message, it will screen both of these data points.

Some organizations with a low risk appetite elect to take a conservative approach toward
managing payments screening by adopting low screening thresholds and investigating all the
numerous hits generated to significantly decrease the risk of violating a sanctions restriction.
Others adopt higher thresholds based ona higher risk appetite in an attempt to effectively
manage the volume of hits generated from payment screening. The former approach can be
very time and cost-intensive compared to the latter approach. However, the latter generally
has a higher risk ofa sanctions violation, which may result ina fine. So organizations must find
the right balance of risk and reward and implement tools and procedures to ensure a process
that is both effective and efficient.

Trade Activity Screening

 

The screening of trade-related activity warrants additional description, as this risk area is
somewhat unique in its regulatory expectations, approach, and challenges.

Trade-Related Sanctions Lists

As with other business lines, sanctions lists are maintained in relation to trade restrictions.
The contents of these lists can differ from the lists previously reviewed in this study guide, but
they do use some of the same identifiers. Additional identifier information is added to trade-

CGSS Page 212
Version 1.531
restriction sanctions lists, such as the goods and services involved and the nature of the
penalties imposed on a target for failing to comply with trade restrictions.

In the United States, the BIS maintains the Consolidated Screening List (CSL) of targets on
which it has imposed trading restrictions. The extent of the restrictions imposed can vary in
severity. For example, for one target it can be an outright prohibition from engaging in certain
trade activity, and for another it can be the stipulation to comply with additional licensing
requirements in order to trade certain goods.

The US Denied Persons List includes individuals and entities whose export privileges have
been denied by the BIS. Identifiers on the Denied Persons List include:

e Registered or incorporation name and registration number

e Registered or legal address or any known operating address

e Jurisdiction associated with the entity and/or its activities

e Types of goods or services involved

e Penalties imposed for noncompliance

The Denied Persons List specifies the time period over which restrictions remain in force,

along with their expiration date.

In the example shown in Table 23, the Denied Persons List doesn’t include extensive, detailed
information about the goods involved or the conduct of the target. But it does includea
citation to the Federal Register, which provides the information that the airline broke the law
four times by re-exporting a 757 aircraft to Iran without US approval. The summary also
identifies the recipient entity—Eram Air—and the trade restrictions that were violated.

Table 23: US Denied Persons List: Denied Person Entry

 

Name and Address Effective Date Expiration Date
AIR BASHKORTOSTAN, LTD. 08/28/2015 08/28/2016
142001, MOSCOW REGION, CITY OF
DOMODEDOVO, CENTRALNY DISTRICT,
PROMYSHLENNAYA STREET, 11B, RUSSIAN
FEDEERATION, DOMODEDOVO, RU, 142001

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regulatory Expectations

In most countries, relevant customs agencies manage information on goods imported and
exported into the jurisdiction and maintain an intelligence database on the import and export
of goods. In a few jurisdictions, other agencies such as the Economic Services Bureau, Free
Zone Authorities, Census and Statistics Department, and Port Terminal Operators also record

CGSS Page 213
Version 1.531
and manage information on goods imported and exported. In most of the jurisdictions, the
information databases are used to capture all relevant information both on imported and
exported goods, including the value of goods and details on the importer, exporter, owner,
receiver, and company. Generally, jurisdictions use a customs declaration form, which can also
be used to detect or investigate sanctions evasion or trade-based money laundering (TBML)
cases. According to the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, “Some jurisdictions have
indicated that the relevant regulator or supervisor provides guidance to reporting entities
regarding TBML vulnerabilities and red flags. Such guidance includes dissemination of
examples of suspicious transactions (i.e., red flags in relation to trade finance, typologies
reports, and papers issued by either FATF or APG) to enhance awareness. Some responses
indicate that, although no specific guidance was provided in relation to TBML, more general
guidelines about AML/CFT were issued to the banking and financial institutions.” 119

In the United States, BIS oversees the enforcement of trade restrictions. Enforcement of
European trade restrictions is undertaken by the Member States, each of which has identified
a regulatory body for this purpose. Regulatory expectations are established with regard to
screening parameters (i.e., who should be screened and when) and dual-use goods.

Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) provides financial intelligence
support to the Australian Federal Police, Australian Border Force, Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission, Australian Taxation Office, and other partner agencies. AUSTRAC
works within the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission’s Eligo Task Force, which
focuses on Australian and international networks involved in money laundering through
various means, including trade-based money laundering. The Monetary Authority of Singapore
(MAS) recognized that the increasing complexity of trade and finance meant there was a need
for more targeted supervision and enforcement work. 12°

SCREENING PARAMETERS

Regulators require sanctions screening in trade finance to be comprehensive and performed
on all of the parties involved ina trade transaction. Importantly, screening should not be
limited to individuals or legal entities. It should also include the:

e Vessel used to transport goods (e.g., name, owners, consigner, consignee)
e Shipping company
e Shipping routes

e Agents or third parties present in the transaction

 

119 Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering, APG Typology Report on Trade Based Money Laundering,
July 20, 2012.

120 “AML/CTF Outlook: Asia-Pacific Regulators to Target Trade-Based Laundering in 2017,” Hong Kong
Lawyer, January 13, 2017.

CGSS Page 214
Version 1.531
e Ports of call (origin port, transshipment location(s), and destination port)

e Recent voyage history of the vessel

Part of the screening process involves reviewing records that might contain relevant
information, such as SWIFT messages, letters of credit, bills of exchange, bills of lading,
commercial invoices, insurance certificates, ship manifests, and certificates of origin.
Additional records might also be sought to check the provenance of the goods and whether
there is evidence that other records might have been falsified or altered.

MT700 messages, which are often used for letters of credit and trade-finance transactions,
carry an elevated sanctions risk. These messages tend to include a significant amount of
unstructured data, including descriptions of the trade finance deals. Because the data is
unstructured, meaning the data is not ina predefined format, MT700 messages can generate
many false positive hits. For example, the “said party” or “for said amount” may generate
numerous matches against OFAC SDNs.

In its 2013 report, the FCA found that sanctions controls could be better applied to trade
transactions, and recommended that:

1. All fields in SWIFT 700 messages should be screened.
2. Allincoming and outgoing payments should be screened.

3. Financial institutions should have procedures that capture new or amended information
received through the life of a transaction and ensure that any changes to payment
messages are screened.

Screening should be performed at the inception ofa trade finance transaction and again when
trade documentation is submitted because some details may have changed. For example, the
vessel used or the ports of call may not have been known at inception and therefore not
screened.

Although ASTs are useful to identify possible financial sanctions risks, given the contextual
nature of trade sanctions their usefulness may be limited when assessing whether trade
sanctions or arms embargoes apply to a specific transaction. For example, if a firm wanted to
specifically monitor for uranium shipments to France because Australia had imposed a trade
sanction, solely relying on an AST would likely either create too many hits (e.g., all payments
from France) or may not be able to screen the underlying trade documents. Therefore, for
screening of trade-related activities, ASTs should be used in conjunction with manual
screening and additional due diligence on a risk-sensitive basis.

DUAL-USE GOODS

Dual-use goods are products, materials, and technologies that can be used for both civilian and
military purposes, such as computers, lasers, magnets, and SCUBA gear. Dual-use goods are
not listed on the same lists as sanctions targets, such as the SDN list in the United States.

CGSS Page 215
Version 1.531
Rather, a list of these goods and the restrictions on their export, use, and license requirements
are described in separate regulations. The restrictions imposed on dual-use goods are also
referred to as embargoes or trade restrictions. In Europe, the EU maintains a list of dual-use
goods and their related restrictions.

The Wassenaar Arrangement (WA) has been established to contribute to regional and
international security. Its aims are as follows:

e Promote transparency and increased responsibility in transfers of conventional arms and
dual-use goods and technologies

e Prevent destabilizing accumulations

e Prevent the acquisitions of arms and dual-use goods and technologies by terrorists

Participating states aim to make national policies that ensure transfers of such items do not
promote development or enhancement of military capabilities that would run counter to the
agreement’s goals. As part of this effort, the participants apply export controls on all items set
forth in the List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies and the Munitions List, aiming to prevent
unauthorized transfers or re-transfers of these items.121

Regulators have identified what they consider to be acceptable and unacceptable practices in
terms of dual-use goods, as outlined in Table 24.

Table 24: Screening Practices for Dual-Use Goods

 

 

Examples of Acceptable Practices Examples of Unacceptable Practices

e Attempting to identify dual-use goodsin | e Failing to attempt to identify dual-use
transactions wherever possible goods in transactions

e Ensuring staff members are aware of e Focusing solely on military or “lethal
dual-use goods issues, as well as end-use” goods
common types of goods that have dual

e Failing to establish a clear dual-use
uses .
goods policy
e Confirming with the exporter in high-
risk situations whether a government
license is required for the transaction

and requesting a copy of the license
when required e Failing to make use of third-party data

sources when possible to undertake
checks on dual-use goods

e Failing to undertake further research
when goods descriptions are vague or
confusing

 

 

 

 

121 The Wassenaar Arrangement, “About Us.”

CGSS Page 216
Version 1.531

 
The inherent sanctions risks related to dual-use goods are often identified through the
conduct undertaken by the parties involved and/or the records provided by them to the front-
line business staff. The following is a list of red flags concerning dual-use goods:

e Thecustomer details are similar to those found on the US BIS List of Denied Persons.
e Thecustomer is reluctant to provide information about the end use of the goods.
e Thecustomer has little or no export or trade business background.

e Thecustomer is evasive or unclear about the intended use of the goods or whether they
will be re-exported by the buyer.

e The shipping route is abnormal for the product and destination.
e Packing is inconsistent with the stated method of shipment or destination.
e Delivery dates are vague, or deliveries are planned for unusual destinations.

e The product’s final destination is a freight-forwarding firm.

Approach

Trade-activity screening differs in a number of ways from simply screening an individual’s
name against a list of sanctions targets. It also differs from payment screening. Trade-activity
screening can involve complex transactions and a voluminous amount of message data related
to just one deal. In addition, trade payment messages often include more free text, which
increases the risk that text can be misunderstood.

In general, the results of trade-activity screening are not necessarily straightforward. For
example:

e Restrictions may relate to specific goods for a specific time period.
e Goods may be restricted based on quantity and composition.

e Targets may be restricted from certain financial activities in specific sectors.

Therefore, an organization might need to determine whether the entity is subject to
conditional sanctions or trade restrictions on dual-use goods, as well as the composition of the
goods and whether they exceed a threshold to the point at which the trade activity is
prohibited. Consider a transaction involving a Russian bank that is subject to sectoral
sanctions in which the issuing of new debt is prohibited, but a foreign exchange transaction is
allowed.

Trade-activity screening creates programming challenges for AST use, as programming all of
the conditional scenarios into the AST can prove challenging; therefore, manual review is also
essential.

CGSS Page 217
Version 1.531
There are other factors unique to trade-activity screening. Amendments to initial
documentation are common, and there are a high number of false positive hits. For example,
the text “CUBA” could be related to an address, part ofa person’s name, or goods, but not to
the actual sanctioned country.

With trade-related activities, there’s a greater risk of a possible US connection (e.g., involving
US currency, persons, or jurisdiction). This possible connection, or “US Nexus,” makes trade-
related activities more likely to be subject in some form or another to US sanctions
regulations. Because a significant amount of trade activity is undertaken using US dollars, US
sanctions and embargo restrictions can apply. In addition, most trade-related controls and
restrictions are not screened by an AST, as trade-related activities remain heavily paper-
intensive.

Another challenge is the fact that licensing requirements can differ from country to country.
Careful attention must be paid to the parameters of these restrictions and the scope of the
license issued.

Evasion is always a risk with trade activity, so it may be necessary to know the transport route
from exporter to importer.

An organization may need to know how goods will be transported and whether it’s possible
that the goods will be diverted while in transit to benefit, or be transported to, a sanctioned
target or jurisdiction.

One way in which vessels avoid detection is by turning off their tracking systems, such as the
Automatic Identification System (AIS).

Complicating matters, sanctions are continually changing. For example, on October 12, 2017,
OFAC revoked longstanding sanctions against Sudan. However, some trade restrictions remain
in place for the export and re-export of certain goods, and a specific license must be obtained
to conduct this trade activity. To ensure that these restrictions are not overlooked, it is
important to continually check the relevant sources listing restricted goods. In this case, for
the United States and Sudan, the US Commerce Control List (CCL) should be consulted.

Challenges

One of the challenges of trade-related screening is that, given the global nature of trade
activity, trade documentation can be described in different ways and using different
languages. The spelling and description of goods and services can differ depending on the
language used in the trade documentation. For example, Hafnium is a metal that is used for
nuclear reactor rods but can also have other commercial applications. It is classified as a dual-
use good that is subject to trade restrictions. The word “Hafnium,” however, can appear in
different ways in trade documents, depending upon the language used. “Hafnium” is “Hafnio”
in Spanish, “Hafnio” in Portuguese, and “alhafniuwm eunsur flzy” in Arabic.

CGSS Page 218
Version 1.531
Another challenge with trade restrictions is the fact that certain goods are restricted under
specific circumstances based on quantity, weight, and form. An AST, as of yet, cannot screen
for this complex information, so a manual review of the relevant records is needed. This
review may include checking whether the good’s weight is within the acceptable range
permitted under the dual-use goods regulations and whether the necessary license for
shipping this quantity has been obtained.

For example, the amount of permitted Hafnium depends upon its form and the amount used in
a product based on its weight. The complex restriction reads, “1C231 Hafnium metal, hafnium
alloys, and compounds containing more than 60% hafnium by weight, manufactures thereof,
and waste or scrap of any of the foregoing.”

Another major operational challenge when screening trade finance transactions is that some
of the documents are presented in a non-digital format, for example, via scanned images sent
via email or fax. This means that portions of the transaction that are not communicated via
SWIFT need to be manually reviewed. This challenge can lead to key items being missed
because analysts do not know all of the risk indicators.

CASE EXAMPLE: COBHAM HOLDINGS, INC, 2018

CASE SUMMARY

In November 2018, the US company Cobham Holdings, Inc. (Cobham) paid fines of $87,507
after entering into a settlement with OFAC on behalf of its subsidiary Aeroflex/Metelics, Inc.
(Metelics). On June 18, 2014, Metelics agreed to ship an order through a Canadian distributor
to the end user, Almaz Antey Telecommunications (AAT). Because Metelics did not have
sufficient stock, the shipments were to take place on June 18, 2014; July 31, 2014; December
19, 2014; and January 15, 2015.

On June 19, 2014, Metelics conducted a denied party screening. Although the screening did
return warnings for Russia generally, it did not return results for AAT, and, after the end-user
certificate was confirmed to be in compliance by the director of global trade compliance, the
shipment was made on June 27, 2014, after an additional screening. On July 16, 2014, OFAC
updated its SDN list and designated Joint-Stock Company Concern Almaz-Antey (JSC Almaz-
Antey). JSC Almaz-Antey owned 51% of AAT.

On July 31, 2014, Metelics began preparing the second shipment. It again conducted screening
that did not produce a match against the added JSC Almaz-Antey; rather, the AST found JSC
Almaz-Antey # Almaz Antey Telecommunications LLC. Metelics made additional shipments up
to January 15, 2015. Cobham determined that the flaw in its AST was caused by the software
reliance on an all words match, despite search criteria set to “fuzzy” so as to detect partial
matches. This meant that the software failed to match “Almaz Antey” when Cobham searched

CGSS Page 219
Version 1.531
for “Almaz Antey Telecom.” Upon discovery, Cobham voluntarily self-disclosed, and the
apparent violations were deemed non-egregious. 122

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Arisk-based approach that includes enhanced measures is required when dealing with
high-risk jurisdictions.

> Firms using ASTs should understand the limitations and functionality of their software,

ideally through internal testing and tuning.

> Sanctions lists are constantly in flux, and business activity that is allowable one day may be
sanctioned the next, resulting in liability even ifthe underlying contract was entered into
before the sanctions were effective.

 

122 US Department of the Treasury, Enforcement Information for November 27, 2018.

CGSS Page 220
Version 1.531
Sanctions Investigations and
Assets Freezing

Conducting Investigations

 

The term “investigation” must be precisely defined before we go on to describe the process
and considerations involved in conducting sanctions investigations. In this context,
investigation refers to the process of examining information that suggests whether or not
someone might be a sanctions target or have a link to a sanctioned activity or jurisdiction. Two
common scenarios that trigger an investigation are when (1) there is a possible name match
between the customer and a sanctions target flagged by the screening tool, and (2) the
customer’s behavior, or information given by or about them, indicates possible evasion
activity or presents a sanctions link.

Regardless of the unique details of each case, every investigation usually consists of two main
parts: simple checks (to discount or confirm a sanctions link), and further investigation
(account review, customer outreach, and possible escalation to the compliance function or
other specialized unit as should be indicated in the institution’s written policies).

Simple checks might include comparing data about a sanctions target or their activities to the
sanctions due diligence (SDD) records you already hold.

Further investigation entails more detailed checking, which is required when initial (simple)
checks cannot confirm or discount the match or link. Simple checks generally occur at the alert
level while further investigation occurs after an alert has been escalated to a case. When
further investigation is needed, the case generally escalates to the compliance function or
some specialized unit identified in the institution’s written policies. In most instances, this is a
complex but largely predictable process that often involves a review of previous account
activity and/or connecting with the customer directly for additional information.

Key Investigation Concepts: Sanctions Lists,
Screening Tools, and Identifiers

CGSS Page 221
Version 1.531
Before examining the investigation process in detail, itis helpful to review a few key concepts
that form the foundation of every effective investigation. Three key concepts shared by all
investigations include sanctions lists, screening tools, and identifiers (of individuals as well as
various legal entities).

SANCTIONS LISTS

Sanctions lists are diverse compilations of data about sanctions targets. These lists are issued
by different regulators, and vary widely in terms of what information they provide and how
much detail they provide about that information. Sanctions lists are living documents—they
are constantly changing—so investigators need to check these lists multiple times throughout
an investigation and note the date and time every time the lists are checked. Additions and
deletions to sanctions lists are made frequently and can occur without prior notice.

SCREENING TOOLS

Automated Screening Tools (ASTs) are complex programs that—at their best—sift through
masses of data points and provide timely, appropriate, and accurate alerts to possible matches
between customers and possible or known sanctions risks. Terms commonly used when
investigating alerts from ASTs include “hit,” “potential match,” or "name match;” “alert” or
“case;” “target match” or “true match;” and “false positive” and “false negative.”

IDENTIFIERS

Identifiers can be divided into two main categories: those for individuals, and those for legal
entities. During an investigation, it is necessary to examine both categories in order to identify
possible sanctions risks associated with a customer or third party.

Key identifiers for individuals include names and aliases (“AKA” or “also known as”),
jurisdiction, date of birth, associations and linkages, passport and/or national identification
number, and other government-issued documents such as a driver’s license, social security
card, or voter registration card.

Shifting our focus to key identifiers for legal entities, it is necessary to examine a broader set of
data that includes:

e The legal entity’s registered or corporate name and registration number

e The entity’s registered or legal address, its main place(s) of business, and/or any known
operating addresses

e ©The jurisdiction associated with the entity and/or its activities

e The names of all associated entities or individuals

CGSS Page 222
Version 1.531
e Any web or email addresses and telephone or fax numbers associated with the entity

e Any other identifying details about the entity

Additionally, since legal entities are generally made up of multiple individuals in various
assigned roles, it’s necessary to gather and examine data on the individuals involved inthe
ownership, control, and operation of the legal entity. These individuals include beneficial
owners, controllers, executives, directors, and other key players. It could also be useful to
gather information on key suppliers, clients, and contractors.

Key Risk Areas

In any investigation, you need to gather and analyze as much pertinent information as possible
about customers or third parties. In this data-driven era, investigators can struggle with the
problem of too much data as well as too little of it. Sometimes, especially in fraud cases, data
could be designed to be intentionally misleading. As you conduct an investigation, it can be
helpful to remember that there are three key risk areas about which to collect, review, and
analyze information. These three common risk areas cover:

1. Information about your customers or third parties (including who owns or controls a legal
entity if that is your customer)

2. Information about the customer’s activities (or about their business, ifthe customer is a
legal entity)

3. Information about jurisdiction or geographic connections the customer or legal entity
might have

The Investigation Process

Imagine you receive an alert from one of your ASTs. What happens next? Who is responsible
for beginning an investigation, and what steps do they need to take first, second, third, and so
on? Answering these questions will be the focus of this section.

Responding to alerts is handled differently by different companies, but most often it is handled
entirely by a company’s compliance function. This role could be assigned to a dedicated unit or
team, which itself could be part of a department or division that is typically part of the “second
line of defense.” As part of the compliance function, the alert monitoring team will take the
initial steps, including weeding out any clear false positives by discovering clear mismatches
or with minimal due diligence. In many cases, a simple check will resolve the issue. For
example, ifthe name that triggered the alert is that ofa legal entity or a vessel, and the
sanctions lists only refer to natural persons, the alert could be dismissed. Similarly, ifan alert
identifies a natural person and you can quickly identify the gender and year of birth but the

CGSS Page 223
Version 1.531
names on the targets list refer to persons ofa different gender or year of birth, you can
consider that it could be a false positive.

If an alert cannot easily be determined to be a false positive—for example, it is a target match
for an existing sanctions identifier—the alerts team will generally recommend the initiation of
a case investigation. To initiate a case investigation, the alert monitoring team will help to
locate the due diligence file already held by the business, as well as any other additional
information available. If the team still believes that the concern cannot be discounted, it will
escalate the case to the dedicated investigation team for further investigation.

Using a Decision Tree for Investigations

Although the details of every investigation are unique, most investigations share a common
process. Case investigation teams and alert management teams often use a five-step decision
tree to determine which alerts can reasonably be discounted and which others warrant an
investigation. Before beginning any investigation, it helps to understand the process to follow
to determine whether the party being investigated poses an actual sanctions risk or not. With
that in mind, it is recommended to take a question-by-question look at a simplified decision
tree that will help keep the investigation on track. Different organizations will probably have
additional rules for investigations, which should be fully described in a written procedure.
After the investigator receives a report from the AST system identifying an alert as a red flag
and describing the possible link with one or more sanctions targets, the five-step decision tree
should be implemented to answer the common, fundamental questions that guide any
investigation from start to finish in a methodical, thorough, and reliable manner.

CGSS Page 224
Version 1.531
Figure 22: Investigation Process

Is there an applicable sanctions

restriction?

Whatis this sanction restriction
about?

© No investigation required

Has this sanction restriction been

violated?

How has the sanction violation
occurred?

Record and document

STEP 1: ASK, “IS THERE AN APPLICABLE SANCTIONS RESTRICTION?”

The first step is to determine whether a sanctions restriction applies to the case under
investigation. In order to answer this broad question, investigators need to answer its related
sub-questions:

e Doesa UN, EU, US Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC), or other national sanction
apply? If so, which one(s)? Recall that sanctions imposed by the United Nations, the
European Union, and other countries around the world might apply to both individuals
and entities, and to certain activities and countries. In addition, the geographic scope of
some sanctions will extend beyond a particular country’s borders, in cases of
extraterritorial application.

e Ifthe answer is “no,” an investigation is not required.

CGSS Page 225
Version 1.531
STEP 2: ASK, “WHAT IS THIS SANCTIONS RESTRICTION ABOUT?”

Now that the sanctions that might apply to the subject of the investigation have been
identified, answer the following question:

e What types of restrictions do the applicable sanctions impose? Common examples of
sanction-imposed restrictions include freezing assets or blocking property, a general
prohibition on all activities and transactions related to a particular country, restrictions
specific to certain targets or activities, export bans, and specific licensing requirements.

STEP 3: ASK, “HAS THIS SANCTIONS RESTRICTION BEEN VIOLATED?”

The third step in the decision tree for investigations is to determine whether or not the
sanctions that might apply have actually been violated. In this step, the team will use the
information it has gathered about the party under investigation to ask the following questions:

e Has this sanctions restriction been violated? To answer this question, the team will turn its
attention to the information gathered during SDD, augmented by information about the
party’s transaction activity and history. Specifically, the organization’s investigation team
needs to answer the following questions about the relationship between the organization
and the target of the investigation:

e Does the financial institution have a relationship with the sanctions target?
e Has the financial institution made funds available to the target?

e Has the financial institution facilitated a transaction for, or on behalf of, the target, or
facilitated trade activity that is prohibited or restricted?

e Ifthe answer is “no,” further investigation is not required.

STEP 4: ASK, “HOW HAS THE SANCTIONS VIOLATION OCCURRED?”

If it is determined that a sanctions restriction has been violated, the fourth step in the
investigation process is to determine how the violation occurred. In other words, ifa
restriction has been violated, what was the root cause that ultimately led to that violation?
How did the violation occur?

The objective here is to determine if the violation was caused by “mechanical” causes, which
may require some adjustments in the future (for instance, fine tuning the alert filters in the
AST system), or “human” causes, such as internal or external stripping, which could signal
criminal behavior.

e Determine the root cause of the alert. At this stage we determine if the alert is genuine; a
violation has only occurred if the alert “correctly” flagged a prohibited transaction. A
violation has not necessarily occurred. Was the alert the result of human error? Deliberate

CGSS Page 226
Version 1.531
circumvention? External stripping in payment messages by an outside organization?
Inadequate training? An improperly calibrated automated screening tool? This step is
crucial in determining ifthis is an isolated incident or if an investigation is required to
determine if other violations may have occurred.

Establishing the cause of a violation—determining its original source—is absolutely critical if
you want to take steps to ensure similar violations will not occur in the future.

STEP 5: RECORD AND DOCUMENT

The final step in the five-step investigation process is every bit as important as the first four:

e Record and document the findings. It can be tempting to treat this step as a bit ofan
afterthought, but do not fall into that trap. Creating and keeping a clear, thorough, and
orderly record of the investigation and its findings, and doing so while the case is still
fresh, is absolutely essential. In the report, indicate the dates and times each step is taken.
This could be critical if the investigation includes searches against sanctions lists, because
names on the lists are regularly added or subtracted by OFAC or other competent agencies.
Accurately document every step taken and every piece of information discovered. File the
complete and final report securely, following your organization’s guidelines.

Regulators expect complete and accurate recordkeeping, including dates that sanctions
investigations were undertaken by an organization and the decisions made based on those
findings. In addition, regulators have stringent reporting requirements when it comes to
assets or funds that have been frozen, and all records pertaining to blocked funds must be kept
for a minimum of five years.

Ata minimum, every complete report should include the following documents and
information:

e Anexplanation of how the alert was triggered and if there were any precedents

e Adetailed, step-by-step description of the investigation, including the dates and times of
each step and the names of the investigators for each step

e Adescription of the review process, including dates and names of the reviewers and
conclusions reached

e Additional research or steps undertaken, if applicable
e Anexplanation of the final review and decisions taken
Each institution should have in place a written policy outlining the reporting process, and

naturally you should adhere to that policy or escalate the investigation if you perceive any
conflict between the implementation of the policy and applicable regulations.

CGSS Page 227
Version 1.531
Applying the Decision Tree to Different Types of
Matches

The five-step decision tree investigation process can be applied to different match types while
conducting an investigation. An investigation is best accomplished by taking one manageable
step ata time. One way of simplifying the process is by dividing all possible matches into four
separate and distinct types:

1. Matches to an individual’s name

2. Matches to an entity’s name

3. Matches to jurisdiction and nature of business
4.

Matches in transactions

Next, you will explore how to evaluate each type of match.

MATCHES TO AN INDIVIDUAL’S NAME

OFAC recommends a multi-step assessment process for evaluating name matches. You may
want to check their Sanctions Compliance FAQs page on the US treasury website. Like the
decision tree used in the initial evaluation of possible sanctions links, this process uses a flow
chart of clear, “Yes/ No” questions designed to focus an investigation and move users through
a process of elimination to determine the validity of a match.

Figure 23: Name Match: Individual or Entity

Is the customer hitting against OFA’s SDN list or target or targeted countries? NO

SE

Is the customer an individual while the name of the SDN listis a vessel, organization or company

(or vice-versa)? YES
Not a valid match
Is only one of the names (i.e. only the given or family name} matching? YES
Compare the complete SDN entry with all of the information you have on the matching customer. No
Are there a number of similarities or exact matches?
Escalate the customer for the further review
CGSS Page 228

Version 1.531
We'll use a case example to take a closer look at each individual step, but—taken as a whole—
OFAC’s step-by-step assessment flow chart consists of four sequential questions.

Question 1: Is the customer hitting against OFAC’s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons (SDN) list or targeted countries?

a. IfYES, continue to the next question.

b. If NO, this is not a valid match.

Question 2: Is the customer an individual, while the name on the SDN list is a vessel,
organization, or company (or vice versa)?

a. If YES, this is nota valid match.

b. IfNO, continue to the next question.

Question 3: Is only one of the names (EITHER the first or given name, OR the family or
surname, but not both) a match?

a. If YES, this is nota valid match.

b. IfNO, continue to the next question.

Question 4: Comparing the complete SDN entry with all of the information you have on the
matching customer, are there a number of similarities or exact matches?

a. If YES, escalate the case for further review.

b. If NO, this is not a valid match.

CASE EXAMPLE (HYPOTHETICAL): MR. TIMTCHENKO

This case example walks through what to do when there is an alert to a name match to an
individual. It uses the hypothetical example of an individual wishing to open an account ata
financial institution from the perspective of a relationship manager. An account application
from a new customer named Mr. Gennadiy Nikolayevich Timtchenko has just landed in the
relationship manager’s inbox for review.

First, answer Question 1: Is the customer hitting against OFAC’s SDN list or targeted
countries?

During the onboarding process, Mr. Timtchenko’s (full) name—Gennadiy Nikolayevich
Timtchenko— is flagged as a potentially valid name match on OFAC’s SDN list.

Note: Names in the OFAC database appear with the family name first, spelled out in all
capital/uppercase letters. So, this individual’s name would appear as TIMTCHENKO Gennadiy
Nikolayevich.

In looking at the OFAC SDN entry for Mr. Timtchenko, the manager discovers that his name is

flagged as a potential match to three similar but separate entries for sanctions targets. (Read

CGSS Page 229
Version 1.531
carefully in order to note the differences, as they are not always obvious.) This means the
answer to Question 1 is YES, and the manager should proceed to Question 2.

Next, answer Question 2: Is the customer an individual, while the name on the SDN listis a
vessel, organization, or company (or vice versa)?

Using both the OFAC SDN information and the information received about Mr. Timtchenko in
his account application, it’s necessary to determine whether the name match is in any way
related to a legal entity rather than an individual. In this case, the customer and the SDN target
are both individuals—no entities are mentioned. Therefore, the answer to Question 2 is NO.
Proceed to Question 3.

Now, answer Question 3: Is only one of the names (EITHER the first or given name, OR the
family or surname, but not both) a match?

To answer this question, you will look closely at all names listed for Mr. Timtchenko. Does only
ONE name match? You find slight differences in the way the customer’s name is spelled in his
application and the way the matched names are spelled in the screening alert (for example,
Timtchenko and Timchenko, or Gennadiyand Gennady). However, you also note that the
customer’s first name and his family name are exact matches to some of the names listed in
the database. This means the answer to Question 3 is NO. Proceed to Question 4.

Note: The terms “last name,” “family name,” and “surname” all refer to the same thing: the
hereditary name usually shared by all members ofa family. Similarly, the terms “first name”
and “given name” both refer to a personal name chosen for each individual child and given to
that child at birth (or very shortly thereafter). In many countries, last names are routinely
spelled out using all capital or uppercase letters, especially on forms and documents. The
OFAC database follows this convention.

Last, answer Question 4: Comparing the complete SDN entry with all of the information you
have on the matching customer, are there a number of similarities or exact matches?

To answer the final question in OFAC’s four-question process of elimination, it’s necessary to
compare the complete collection of data about Mr. Timtchenko found in the SDN entry,
including his country of birth, nationality, current residential address, and any other data
available. You find that Mr. Timtchenko reported being born in Armenia; this is an exact match
to one of the SDNs identified. He claimed Armenian nationality, which is also an exact match to
one of the SDNs in the database. He listed his residential address as being in Hamburg,
Germany; the OFAC listing was different, indicating an address in Geneva, Switzerland. In his
application, Mr. Timtchenko listed only the year in which he was born, which was 1952; the
sanctions target identifier specifies a day, month, and year (also 1952). Matching the year of
birth is sufficient, even if matching the exact date is not possible—so this is another match. A
number of similarities or exact matches between the information on the customer’s account
application and the complete SDN entry are found. The answer to Question 4 is YES, and the
hit cannot be discounted. The next step is to escalate the case for further review.

Note: There could be at least one complicating factor. Typically, Timtchenko is listed in OFAC
as a transliteration ofa Russian or Ukrainian name, originally in the Cyrillic alphabet, and in

CGSS Page 230
Version 1.531
Russian the patronymic name could vary according to gender. Thus, the spouse (or daughter)
of Mr. Timtchenko might be Mrs. or Ms. Timtchenka.

ESCALATING A NAME-MATCH CASE FOR FURTHER REVIEW

To continue the investigation of the new customer, Mr. Timtchenko, use the five-step
investigation process described earlier. Since this is an escalation, you have already answered
Step 1 and should begin with Step 2.

Step 2: Describe what the sanctions restriction is about.

Here, you will want to verify the accuracy of previous work conducted and, if necessary,
confirm the escalation is a target match/true match. In Mr. Timtchenko’s case, the initial
search results indicate that there is a sanction that applies to him—a Ukraine-related sanction
listed as program “UKRAINE-E013661” in the OFAC database. Digging a bit deeper, you learn
that the new customer is believed to have acted for, on behalf of, or has provided material or
other support to, a senior official in the Russian government. Specifically, Mr. Timtchenko’s
activities in the energy sector have been directly linked to Vladimir Putin. Proceed to Steps 3
and 4.

Steps 3 and 4: Determine whether the sanctions restriction has been violated and, if so, how it
occurred.

Next, it is necessary to examine whether the applicable restriction has in fact been violated
and, if so, how the violation occurred. The first task is to check to see whether (a) the
customer already has other accounts with the organization, or (b) funds from the customer
have already been received. If neither situation has occurred, it is unlikely a sanctions
restriction has been violated—and the answer to Step 3 would be NO. If the answer to Step 3
is NO, itis not necessary to complete Step 4; because there is no transaction, there cannot have
been a violation, and therefore there is no need to describe how a violation occurred.

Step 5: Record and Document

Regardless of whether you find that a violation has occurred or not, it is necessary to wrap up
every investigation by recording and documenting each step in your decision-making process.
It is then necessary to refer to your organization’s procedures for notifying unsuccessful
applications made by sanctions targets or transactions they attempt to make. It may also be
necessary to check your country’s laws, or those of the applicable sanctions jurisdiction, to
verify whether reporting findings to the regulator is necessary. For example, OFAC requires
that all transactions rejected for sanction-related reasons be reported to them within ten
business days.

MATCHES TO AN ENTITY’S NAME

Another type of investigation you will need to conduct is of aname match to a legal entity,
such as a business. In order to understand how to investigate a match to a legal entity, let’s

CGSS Page 231
Version 1.531
work from an example. Imagine you are an investigator at a bank in the EU. The bank operates
globally, and you’ve just received an alert from your AST about a possible name match relating
to an existing customer, Alfa International Trading Company. Your bank has completed the
customer due diligence and sanctions due diligence on your customer, who has just been
flagged as a possible match to “Alfa Investment and International Trading (ALFA).”

Now, begin the investigation guided by the decision tree described earlier. The first question
to answer is, (1) Is the customer hitting against the UN, EU, OFAC or other relevant sanctions
list? Confirm whether the customer is a sanctions target, and check all of the possible
sanctions that might apply, since every list contains different information. In checking the lists,
you discover that the customer is hitting against both the EU and OFAC sanctions lists.
Therefore, the answer to this question is YES. Continue to the next step in the decision tree.

The second question to answer in investigating this name match to a legal entity is, (2) Is the
customer an individual, while the name on the sanctions lists are vessels, organizations, or
companies (or vice versa)? In this case, the customer is a legal entity, and so is the sanctions
target, so the answer is NO. Proceed to the next question.

The next question in the decision tree is (3) Is only one of the names (i.e., only the given name
OR the family name) a match? Dig a little deeper into the details of the names involved to
answer this question. A number of word matches are found—Alfa, International and Trading
are all exact matches, and other parts are very similar although not exact matches. Because
there is more than a single matching word in the compared names, the answer to this question
is NO. Proceed to the next step of the decision tree.

Question 4 requires investigators to dig deeper still: (4) Compare the complete entry with all
of the information on the matching customer; are there a number of similarities or exact
matches? Answering this question involves looking at all the identifiers. The first identifier to
consider is jurisdiction. Both listings (European Union and United States (OFAC)) indicate that
ALFA is based in Amman, Jordan. The customer is based in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), but also has offices (a branch or subsidiary) in Jordan. This similarity is noted. Next,
examine the names of any associated individuals. Here, itis noted that the OFAC listing does
not provide this information, but the EU list does, listing ALFA’s director: Nabil Victor Karam.
The customer’s general manager is a Mr. Ali Mohsen, from the UAE.

Now, considering everything discovered in the investigation thus far and the SDD in the
customer file, we want to understand why this pre-existing customer is only now alerting. Was
the sanctioned target just recently added? Based on this example, the SDD on file did not allow
us to compare whether Nabil Victor Karam is a director of our customer as we only have
information on the general manager. This information does not allow us to make any
additional conclusions. We want to conclude whether this is a target match or false positive,
but given the similarities between the customer and the sanctioned target and also because
this is an existing customer, the investigator will want to request more information to make a
final conclusion. This may entail an event-triggered review where SDD is reviewed and
updated in order to better analyze the similarities. In the meantime, the risk that the customer
is a sanctioned target is present and needs to be mitigated. The investigator should coordinate

CGSS Page 232
Version 1.531
with other departments to put a hold on the customer’s accounts to prevent processing any
future transactions without additional oversight and control while the investigation is
pending.

MATCHES TO JURISDICTION AND NATURE OF BUSINESS

We've considered matches to names and matches to legal entities; now let’s consider matches
to jurisdiction and nature of business. In the position ofa relationship manager, imagine that
during a routine review for ongoing monitoring you discover that the risk profile for an
existing customer describes her as a “consultant to foreign governments and officials,
including those of Libya.” Unlike investigations into name matches or entity matches,
investigations into matches of jurisdiction or nature of business focus on connections rather
than names. In this case, the customer has a connection to Libya (a jurisdiction). To learn
more, we need to begin the five-step investigation of this case. Let’s take each of the five
questions in turn:

1. Is there an applicable sanctions restriction?

YES. There are UN, EU, and US restrictions against Muammar Gaddafi’s family and close
associates.

2. What is this sanctions restriction about?

It concerns freezing assets, not dealing in funds of sanctions targets, and the restrictions
related to the oil sector in Libya.

3. Has this sanctions restriction been violated?
Answering this question requires more information. For example, it is necessary to ask:
e Who are the customer’s clients, and are they sanctions targets themselves?
e What payments have been received? Is the payer a sanctions target?
e Does the customer’s consulting involve the oil sector?
e Who are the customer’s associates and/or business partners?

e Is there any additional information that could deepen our understanding of the
possible connection between the customer and the sanctions restrictions?

4. Ifasanctions violation occurred, how did it happen?

It’s not enough to simply decide YES or NO here; you'll need to explain everything you
have discovered about how the sanctions violation happened.

5. Finally, record and document the entire investigation.

Do this while the investigation is fresh in your mind, so you have a detailed and useful report
ready to use for future reference into this or a related case.

CGSS Page 233
Version 1.531
In this case, an additional investigation will be conducted by a specialized team or unit of your
institution. Further investigation should include the customer’s transactional history and due
diligence conducted on counterparties. The Libyan sanctions are tailored to particular persons
and the oil sector. If investigation finds no connections to the Gaddafi family and nexus, and
the counterparties and business are not engaged in the oil sector, then there is sufficient
evidence to determine that this customer’s activity is permissible and no reportable
transactions are involved (i.e., no sanctions violations). However, based on this investigation, a
firm may wish to place this customer under additional scrutiny and monitoring, for example,
by reviewing Libya-related transactions ona monthly basis to ensure the activity remains
reasonable and permissible. Alternatively, if due diligence determines that transactions have
occurred related to the Gaddafis or with the oil industry, the investigation should continue
until it is determined whether a sanctions violation has occurred. If one has, then (1) the
investigator may recommend that a hold be placed on the customer’s account to prevent any
future sanctions violations until additional measures can be applied (including possibly
closing the account), and (2) the investigator should follow internal policy and procedures for
escalating the activity for a voluntary disclosure (if this is after the fact) or for block/reject if
the transaction is in process, but not released. Based on the results of this investigation and
review by a supervisor, a suspicious transaction report (STR), also known asa suspicious
activity report (SAR), might be filed.

CASE EXAMPLE: U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, 2018

CASE SUMMARY

Now, let’s look at a different case example from 2018 involving the U.S. Bank National
Association (U.S. Bank). In February 2018, the US Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN) found that U.S. Bank was risk-rating its customers using incomplete information.
Specifically, U.S. Bank failed to collect citizenship and occupation information about some of
its customers. This resulted in some high-risk customers essentially “falling through the
cracks” and avoiding the enhanced monitoring they should have received. Further
investigation revealed that U.S. Bank had missed no fewer than 136 suspicious examples
related to high-risk customers or transactions.

KEY TAKEAWAYS:

> US. Bank failed to (universally) collect the citizenship information that is a key identifier
for jurisdiction or geographic connections, as well as the occupational information that is a
key identifier for the nature of a customer’s business.

> Without these data points, U.S. Bank couldn’t consistently and accurately identify
sanctions risks among its customers.

CGSS Page 234
Version 1.531
MATCHES IN TRANSACTIONS (NAME OR NATURE OF ACTIVITY)

Another type of investigation you might conduct occurs when you receive an alert toa
possible match in transactions. These matches can either be to the name or nature of an
activity, or to a transaction involving the assets or funds belonging to a sanctions target.

As with the previous types of matches investigated, an effective investigation into a
transaction depends on the data you hold about the customer(s) involved. When the screening
tool alerts you to missing information in a transaction message or a pattern suggesting
suspicious activity, you won't be able to attribute this to a specific customer if you don’t have
complete information on all customers. To understand this relationship between transactions
and the simplified due diligence you hold on your customers, look at the case of Deutsche
Bank and a series of “mirror trades.”

CASE EXAMPLE: DEUTSCHE BANK “MIRROR TRADES,” 2017

CASE SUMMARY

In January 2017, the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) discovered that Deutsche Bank
had processed a number of suspicious transactions called “mirror trades.” These trades served
as a way of moving funds (rubles) out of Russia and into other jurisdictions and currencies
(generally pounds sterling or US dollars), possibly as part of a money-laundering scheme. The
total outflow of funds from Russia was estimated to be $10 billion over four years. The bank
operated in “silos,” with each unit conducting its own due diligence but not consolidating the
information gathered at the global level. Because of inadequate Know Your Customer (KYC)
held on its corporate customers and this lack of global supervision, Deutsche Bank processed
suspicious trades without identifying the transactions as such. Specifically, Deutsche Bank
failed in several ways: (1) it did not reliably document ownership structures of its corporate
customers, (2) it did not collect and verify passport copies, (3) it did not collect information
on the nature and purpose of customer business and sources of funds, and (4) the
KYC/enhanced due diligence (EDD) information was not circulated among different units of
the bank and there was a lack of overall global supervision. These failures—which some say
were due to staffing shortages in the compliance department, and others say were due to
greed (for commissions in a flagging market)—meant that connections to suspicious
customers went undetected. In all, investigators identified 2,400 suspicious trades processed
by the bank. The lack of sufficient data held on customers resulted ina situation in which
sanctions targets could make transactions without being investigated, or even flagged, by
Deutsche Bank. Deutsche Bank was fined $630 million by US and UK regulators as a result.

Here’s how the mirror trades were made. First, a Russian customer of Deutsche Bank Moscow
bought Russian securities from Deutsche Bank Moscow, paying in rubles (the “Moscow side”).
At the same time, a non-Russian customer of Deutsche Bank sold the same number of the same
securities to Deutsche Bank in exchange for US dollars (the “London side”). As a result of its
poor KYC, Deutsche Bank did not know that the customers on the Moscow side and those on
the London side were connected to each other through common directors, owners, employees,

CGSS Page 235
Version 1.531
or addresses. In fact, Deutsche Bank repeatedly failed to make this connection even after
multiple industry experts shared their concerns with Deutsche Bank about possible
connections between their London-side and Moscow-side customers, and after transactions
were escalated for investigation.

KEY TAKEAWAYS:

> Deutsche Bank’s lack of complete information about its customers and their connections
created a trading environment in which it was entirely possible that transactions were
conducted by or on behalf of known sanctions targets.

The second type of transaction match involves identifying any assets, funds, and economic
resources belonging to a sanctions target once you have established a match between assets
and a customer or third party. The definition of “assets, funds, and economic resources” is
intentionally broad. It includes funds in checking and savings accounts, cash, physical
property, and various financial instruments such as securities, bonds, money orders, notes,
letters of credit, dividends, and so on. These definitions are generally shared by the UN, EU,
and national authorities around the world.

In order to identify an asset match in a transaction, the institution must hold thorough,
accurate, and verified information about what each customer owns as far as assets are
concerned. To be accurate, and to the fullest extent possible, this should include all assets for
which the sanctions target is the beneficial owner. This can be a difficult process because a
sanctions target will generally try to hide or disguise some assets. In many cases, assets could
be indirectly owned by a chain of entities; for instance, a seagoing vessel could be owned bya
navigation company that is controlled by one or several holding companies. Some assets, such
as real estate properties, could be purchased by a blend of legal and illegal funds
(“structuring” and “mingling” in anti-money laundering [AML] language). Assets could also be
registered under the name of third parties. Any and all of these complicating factors can make
the process of matching assets challenging.

The institution must have effective controls in place for freezing these assets in a timely and
comprehensive manner. Institutions also need to have a clear and complete understanding of
the target’s “footprint” across the organization: In which of the branches or locations does the
target hold assets, and in which lines of business?

CASE EXAMPLE: DANSKE BANK, 2018

CASE SUMMARY

In 2007, Danske Bank, one of the major Scandinavian banks, acquired Sampo Bank in Estonia
and converted it into a branch, but failed to integrate its compliance units. Compliance officers
in the bank’s head office were thus unable to assess the global footprint of many customers
who in fact were linked to Russian oligarchs subject to sanctions. It is estimated that more
than €200 billion ($237 billion) from 2007 to 2015 were illegally transferred. The main
conduit for these transfers was the Estonian branch “non-resident portfolio,” comprising

CGSS Page 236
Version 1.531
about 10,000 accounts. Investigators have examined 6,200 accounts and deem “the vast
majority” to be suspicious.

By contrast, the branch had reported only 760 clients to the Financial Intelligence Unit, the
Estonian police division dealing with financial crime. The investigators have identified 177
customers—mostly partnerships registered in Britain or well-known tax havens—potentially
involved in the “Russian Laundromat,” a vast fraud exposed by a group of investigative
journalists known as the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP)

In preliminary criminal charges filed on November 28, 2018, Danish prosecutors accused
Danske of failing to report suspicious transactions, not training staff in anti-money laundering
procedures and having no senior manager responsible for compliance. At least eight other
banks handled some suspicious money in related transactions, among them three
correspondent banks that linked the Estonian branch to America’s financial system: Deutsche
Bank, Bank of America, and JPMorgan Chase & Co. The CEO of Dankse had to resign on October
1, 2018 and may face criminal charges. Several inquiries by regulators were made in Europe
and the United States.

KEY TAKEAWAYS:

> The problems that surfaced at Danske Bank in 2018 provide a clear example of lack of
client identification. There are at least two lessons to be learned:

> Ifyour institution acquires an entity, especially in a different jurisdiction, you should make
sure there is thorough due diligence on all customers of the acquired entity at the time of
the acquisition; this may require a new “onboarding” of these customers.

> Ifyou work fora large organization, such as a “global” bank, you should make sure the
systems and procedures of all entities in the group are integrated and harmonized so that
you can have a consolidated view of each customer’s activities.

CGSS Page 237
Version 1.531
Reviewing Relevant Sources of
Information

 

Collecting and recording relevant, detailed, accurate, and thorough information about all
customers and every transaction forms the foundation of any effective investigation or review.
Without good data, suspicious activity cannot be flagged, and without being flagged, it will not
be investigated.

So, where and how do you search for good data and information pertinent to an investigation?

Successful investigators rely on common, trusted search tools and techniques, and focus on
the three key risk areas for sanctions due diligence—specifically, the customers’ identity, the
nature of the business, and any jurisdiction/geographic connections. What information to look
for, and where to look for it, are the topics of the following sections.

Primary Sources of Information

Sources of information can be divided into two broad categories: primary sources and
secondary sources. We’ll examine primary sources of information first.

Primary sources of information provide direct evidence about sanctions or sanctions targets.
Sanctions instruments and official sanctions lists published by government bodies and their
regulators represent a critical type of primary sources of information. These key primary
sources encompass various types of documents, including key legal documents, key sanctions
lists, key trade activity lists, and transaction activity.

KEY LEGAL DOCUMENTS

The following documents are a selected sampling of the legal documents available, as each
jurisdiction issues its own rules and regulations and determines the scope of enforcement.
These documents are readily available online through the respective government or agency
website.

e United Nations Security Council Resolutions
e European Union Council Regulations and European Union Council Decisions

e United States Executive Orders

CGSS Page 238
Version 1.531
KEY SANCTIONS LISTS

Here again, the following items represent a sample of the sanctions lists that it might be
necessary to consult, as each jurisdiction generally issues its own sanctions lists along with its
own rules and regulations. All are available online.

e Consolidated United Nations Security Council Sanctions List

e Consolidated list of persons, groups, and entities subject to European Union financial
sanctions

e OFAC’s SDN and non-SDN lists

KEY TRADE ACTIVITY LISTS

Key trade activity lists serve to identify the specific government instrument that imposes
restrictions or prohibits the trade of certain goods. These lists identify parties whose trade
activities have been restricted for failing to comply with existing restrictions. As always, keep
in mind that each jurisdiction generally issues its own lists. As these primary sources are
generated by governmental authorities, they are considered to be the most reliable:

e Common Military List of the European Union. This is a list of weapons and dual-use goods
under the Wassenaar Arrangement.

e United States Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) Denied
Persons List. This is a list of individuals and entities whose export privileges have been
denied due to past conduct, such as individuals and entities that have traded with
sanctioned jurisdictions, such as North Korea, or terrorist groups.

e United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) Controls. The NRC Controls regulate
the types of nuclear equipment, such as reactors or components, and fuel used in weapons
of mass destruction that require licenses when being exported.

e United Kingdom Strategic Export Control Lists. The UK Strategic Export Control Lists, like
the NRC Controls, specify and regulate those goods that require an export license.

e France’s Directorate General of the Treasury (DG Trésor) List. This is a table of countries
with related sanctions and measures.

INTERNAL CUSTOMER RECORDS AND TRANSACTION ACTIVITY

The final primary source of information lies within the firm’s records: the information the firm
holds on each customer from its KYC and SDD. Both KYC and SDD are firsthand evidence
provided directly to the firm by the customer, and most of these internal records are reliable.
The firm will have procedures in place that identify which sources of information can be relied
upon as primary sources for simplified KYC, SDD, or investigations.

CGSS Page 239
Version 1.531
e For individuals, KYC and SDD will include government-issued forms of identification—
such as a passport—containing the customer’s full legal name, date of birth, place of birth,
and a photograph clearly showing the individual’s face.

e For legal entities, KYC and simplified SDD is likely to include certified legal documentation
verifying the customer’s legal and trading names, place(s) of operation, and key
individuals within the business (such as directors, chief officers, trustees, and so on).

e = Transaction Activity and “Look Backs” are another valuable internal source of information
about the customers. When conducting an investigation, it can be helpful to review the
customer’s transaction activity, either currently or over a specific time period in the past.
(This process is often referred to as a “look-back.”) Reviewing a customer’s recent or past
transactions can help in a number of ways, including verifying a customer’s actual activity
and revealing red flags by identifying transactions that might indicate links to sanctions
targets or jurisdictions and/or spotting payments made in violation of specific sanctions
restrictions. Existing files and data may reveal all sorts of useful information and
investigators should have access to all data already collected.

REVIEW OF TRANSACTION ACTIVITY

The following example demonstrates how a transaction review can resolve issues identified in
the SDD process. To address an identified deficiency, your bank enhances its screening tool to
include screening address information against sanctions lists. From the enhanced process, you
find that a current account holder is flagged for his residential address, which is located ina
country subject to comprehensive sanctions. The firm’s front-line staff contacts the customer,
who tells them that the address is outdated—he has been living at Flat 10, London Road,
Cambridge, UK, since 2015.

Claims like this sound reasonable enough—people do move, after all—but the accuracy of this
information needs to be verified rather than accepted at face value. It’s necessary to learn
more in order to be sure the firm has not dealt in funds in any way that violates sanctions
restrictions. A customer may have several addresses and operate across many jurisdictions.

To find the information needed, launch a basic review of the customer’s account activity. In
this review, you notice that for the past four years, the customer has been making regular
purchases at Cambridge-area supermarkets. He has also been paying utility bills for the
property at the London Road address he provided. Additionally, you find monthly, direct-
deposit salary payments from a company based in the United Kingdom. These three data
points seem to indicate the customer’s active residency in the United Kingdom, which is
consistent with the customer’s statement. Even this simple review of transaction activity has
already helped verify the new information the customer provided.

Another approach would be to start with the date the applicable sanctions restriction went

into effect. Why would this date make a difference? It’s simple: If the customer’s “problematic”
address on file (the one ina country currently subject to comprehensive sanctions) was listed

CGSS Page 240
Version 1.531
before the sanctions restrictions went into effect, the address would not have raised an
immediate red flag during the onboarding process (though, upon sanctions being imposed,
this should have raised an alert within 24 to 48 hours). In this sort of look-back review,
examine when events happened relative to each other. Specifically, when did the sanctions go
into effect, and when did the customer live in the country being sanctioned? Take a broader
historical and political look at the customer’s location and activity in light of the timing of the
sanctions and the location the sanctions targeted.

If it’s determined that the customer resided in the sanctioned country when the sanctions
were in effect, or he has sent payments to or received payments from that jurisdiction since
the sanctions restrictions were imposed, it’s necessary to escalate the case for further
investigation, as it could mean that the bank—possibly—dealt in funds in violation of the
sanctions restrictions.

Other Considerations for Determining the Scope of Transactional Review

We've already seen some of the ways in which transaction activities can be a great source of
primary information, but there are two additional factors to keep in mind when conducting
this type of review. The following are some of the more important considerations—and
potential red flags.

First, it often helps to limit the review to transactions that occurred within a defined, optimal
timeframe. Defining the length of the look-back in this way will depend on the specifics of each
case, as well as on your company’s general policies and standard procedures for look-back
reviews. For example, you could frame the time period to try to identify a possible past
sanctions violation. Depending on the firm’s preferred procedure, you will often begin by
looking at the past 12 months, only looking further back if a possible violation has been found
in that period. This is a good strategy in locations (such as Cuba and Iran) with longstanding
sanctions restrictions in place, because in these cases it can be difficult to determine exactly
when a customer left the sanctioned territory.

Second, it is necessary to define the nature of payments the review will encompass. Certain
types of transactions are more highly correlated with red flags than others are. Just three
examples of possible red flags are:

e Purchases made online. These can be problematic because they can be made from
anywhere in the world and easily paid for with a payment card from an unsanctioned
territory.

e Cross-border payments to countries with proximity to sanctioned territories. Payments
made to countries close to sanctioned territories (such as Turkey and Syria) can pointtoa
possible connection between the customer and businesses or individuals within the

CGSS Page 241
Version 1.531
sanction-restricted area. For this reason, all cross-border transactions should be
scrutinized carefully.

e Transactions involving a money service business (MSB). These transactions can be hard to
identify, but the firm might maintain a list of them for reference. Transactions to or from
an MSB might indicate a customer’s connection to a sanctioned jurisdiction, as MSBs are
often used as intermediaries in the flow of funds into and out of restricted areas.

Additionally, it’s necessary to determine the extent of payment message review. Has the
customer transferred funds into and out of its accounts? How and when were the transfers
made? Have all the parties to these transactions been identified?

CUSTOMER OUTREACH

Another primary source of information is customer outreach, which helps provide a better
understanding of customers and their activity. Customer outreach is a logical extension of the
KYC and SDD information the firm has on file. Especially when public data is sparse or
unavailable, it is an important investigational tool that falls to first-line team members.
Relationship managers and other customer-facing staff will be best placed to conduct
customer outreach and communicate the findings to the compliance team. While conducting
customer outreach during an active investigation, however, keep in mind that the
investigation process may also involve an AML investigation and as such should maintain
confidentiality and avoid tipping off the customer.

One unique and valuable aspect of customer outreach is that it provides investigators with the
opportunity to observe the customer’s behavior in response to a request for additional
information. The vast majority of the firm’s customers will cooperate fully with any such
requests, eager to get to the bottom of the confusion and, in essence, clear their reputations. A
response that is evasive, defensive, or confrontational could indicate that the customer has not
been entirely honest with the firm, or has perhaps sought to hide or misrepresent certain
transactions for some reason. Of course, this does not necessarily mean the customer is guilty
of violating a sanctions restriction, but it raises a red flag and warrants further investigation.

Secondary Sources of Information

Secondary sources contain information that has generally already appeared in primary
documents. Inquiries for gathering primary sources and gathering secondary sources are
conducted separately. If there is a discrepancy between primary sources and secondary
sources, it is a red flag that deserves, at minimum, further investigation in order to clarify the
discrepancy. Commonly used secondary sources include corporate registers, third-party
databases, and media publications. Like primary sources, secondary sources can provide
valuable information about customers. That said, remember that not all secondary sources are

CGSS Page 242
Version 1.531
equally reliable. Just as news stories from different media channels and outlets vary in their
accuracy, some secondary sources are more valuable than others.

GOOGLE AND OTHER SEARCH ENGINES

An easy way to find information on an entity or individual is to do a Google search. The search
will provide basic information that may need to be corroborated, but could be an efficient
starting point for an investigation. The initial search could also provide additional threads for
further investigation. This type of search could also provide useful positive or negative indices
to support or deny elements ofan investigation and eliminate false positives. For example, if
Corporation X matches against the sanctions list, albeit not with a full name match, and
additional research on Google finds and verifies that Corporation X is actually in dairy while
the sanctions target is engaged in nuclear technology, this can be verified by transactional
activity and the investigation can be closed. When following this course, it is important to
document each step of the investigation, such as including in the file screenshots of the results
of the search.

SOCIAL MEDIA

Social media like Facebook, Instagram, and LinkedIn are not reliable sources of information as
the information is not verified and can be easily edited or manipulated by the party under
investigation. However, social media can reveal interesting and useful information on
connections between parties and provide leads for further investigation.

CORPORATE REGISTERS

Corporate registers—often publicly available on the company’s website or at websites
maintained by professional associations or entities such as chambers of commerce or legal
databases—include information about when a corporation was formed and who its owners
and directors are.

In the United States, the Secretary of State for each state and the District of Columbia
maintains a register that can be accessed electronically. Each state has its own website.
Information available on these websites generally includes the type of organization
(corporation, limited liability company [LLC], not-for-profit, etc.), address, date of
incorporation, registered organizers and officers, place(s) of business, and information on the
current status of the entity. It can inform whether the company is still in existence or if it has
been disbanded. Basic financial information may also be available on state registries.

Other jurisdictions in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries have similar registers that are easily accessible.

If an entity is being investigated that issues stock or other securities, the exchange(s) where
the instruments are traded will maintain updated legal and financial information including

CGSS Page 243
Version 1.531
copies of quarterly and annual reports. Some of these documents can be quite detailed and
provide information on the type(s) of business the company engages in, the markets in which
it operates, its key customers, and other details that could be helpful to an investigator.

THIRD-PARTY DATABASES

Third-party databases can be a good source of both primary and secondary sources. Although
third-party databases are often helpful with due diligence, the information they provide
should never stand on its own. Rating agencies maintain databases that can be consulted
(sometimes for a fee); exchanges (NYSE, HKEX) can also be sources of information. Legal
databases can generally be consulted at no or low cost, and some specialized companies
provide information to their subscribers.

Some specialized companies are in the business of providing integrated services that allow
financial institutions to meet all regulatory requirements (not only sanctions requirements).
These companies can provide tailored, comprehensive solutions that include the coverage of
politically exposed persons (PEP), close associates, and family members; state-owned entities
and state-invested enterprises; global sanctions lists, American sanctions lists, and narrative
sanctions (sanctions ownership information); global regulatory and law enforcement lists;
negative media; Iran economic interest (IEI); and vessels information. Those tools are usually
provided ona subscription basis; they can be quite sophisticated and require special training
to use effectively.

MEDIA PUBLICATIONS

Like third-party databases, media publications vary widely in their accuracy and usefulness to
an investigation. Some media publications make accurate reporting a top priority, while others
place a higher value on sensational stories that boost sales, clicks, “likes,” or traffic to the
publisher’s web page. For this reason, many organizations maintain lists both of media
publications that either can or cannot be consulted in an investigation.

SPECIALIST TEAMS

In addition to corporate registers, third-party databases, and media publications, specialists
such as advisory teams or law firms (or both) can be called in for additional support. These
can be internal advisory teams, external advisors, or intelligence-provider firms. Many firms
have internal, established sanctions advisory teams made up of specialists in sanctions
regulations and related laws; these teams often include former employees of regulatory
bodies. Firms might also have well-established relationships with legal experts outside of the
firm. Additionally, some firms hire an external intelligence search provider; these search
providers often have local sources available in several countries, which is especially important
in jurisdictions with less transparency.

CGSS Page 244
Version 1.531
If you deem it necessary to use such additional resources, do so in line with your institution’s
policies. As there are almost always additional costs associated with these additional
resources, there will likely be some restrictions, or prior approval from management may be
required.

Identifying and Blocking (or Freezing)
Assets

 

Now that the investigation has been conducted, this section discusses what comes next: the
processes for identifying assets and blocking or freezing them in the event ofa sanctions
violation on the customer’s part.

Identification of Assets

Broadly defined, the term “asset” refers to any funds or economic resources owned by the
customer. Although the details vary slightly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, the conceptual
definition is relatively constant around the world. This ensures that all types of assets
intended to be covered by a sanctions restriction are in fact covered. Some of the items
commonly considered as assets include:

e Cash e Notes e Safety deposit boxes
© Checks © Warrants (and their contents)
e Bank Deposits e Derivative contracts Cars, planes, boats
e Debts and debt e Insurance policies * Works ofart and other
ae valuable objects
obligations

e Dividends

e Real estate properties
* Money Orders e Letters of credit

e Securities e Virtual assets
e Bills of lading

e Bonds

Legal requirements in a given jurisdiction govern which of a customer’s assets must be frozen
or blocked when a sanctions violation occurs. You will need to read and understand the types
of assets a specific legislative body requires be frozen in each case. OFAC’s website and the
European Union Guidance on Sanctions document are often helpful in this regard. The EU
Service for Foreign Policy Instruments (FPI) maintains a website that outlines applicable
policies and restrictions.

CGSS Page 245
Version 1.531
In order to be effective, the process of freezing a sanctions target’s funds (or other assets)
must occur quickly and effectively. Asset freezing, which is similar to asset blocking, should
take place immediately after a legislative act comes into force. In order to avoid the
predictable response of asset flight—in which a customer attempts to move assets into a
different jurisdiction—the time between a designation being made public (adding a target to a
list) and the freezing of assets must be as short as possible.

United Nations Security Council resolutions on sanctions, adopted under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, refer to the freezing of financial assets or economic resources
“without delay.” This means that the financial institution will need to act promptly to prohibit
access to these assets. This is done by placing a block or restriction on the assets to prevent
the target from accessing them. This is necessary to prevent the dual risks of asset flight and
asset dissipation.

Comparing Blocking or Freezing Assets in the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands

To get an idea of how different jurisdictions handle blocking or freezing the assets ofa
designated person, it is useful to look at the processes in the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands. (Remember that in the United States, firms need to follow OFAC’s requirements.)

In the United Kingdom, a firm must either know with certainty, or have “reasonable cause to
suspect,” that it is in possession or control of the funds or economic resources of a designated
person, or that the firm is somehow otherwise dealing in these funds or resources. Reasonable
cause to suspect is defined as a situation in which there are factual circumstances from which
an honest and reasonable person should have inferred knowledge or formed the suspicion of
wrongdoing. As soon as certainty or reasonable cause to suspect is established, the firm must
(1) freeze the designated person’s assets, (2) make the assets unavailable to the designated
person or for that person’s benefit, and (3) not deal with the assets (avoid “dealing in funds”).
This is the procedure that must be followed unless there is a reliable exemption in the
legislation, the investigator has a license from the Office of Financial Sanctions
Implementation (OFSI), and the investigator reports the individual to OFSI.

The Netherlands has its own requirements regarding freezing a customer’s assets. This next
example is taken from the Dutch Central Bank (DNB)’s Guidance on the Anti-Money
Laundering and Counter-Terrorist Financing Act and the Sanctions Act. The Netherlands case
is a reminder that many types of companies need to impose sanctions restrictions—not only
banks. Insurance companies, for example, also need to comply with sanctions regulations.

Imagine an insurance company has issued a third-party liability policy that will pay
compensation to someone injured in an automobile accident. If the accident were to occur, the
insurance company would need to ensure the beneficiary was not a designated person ona
sanctions list. If the beneficiary is a designated person, the insurance company needs to freeze

CGSS Page 246
Version 1.531
that person’s assets (the insurance compensation due under the terms of the policy), and
make no payment. Then, the insurer needs to notify the regulator about the frozen assets, and
keep the assets frozen in a separate account until the insurer receives further notice from the
regulator. In brief, the system in the Netherlands looks like this:

e Theassets of customers identified as designated persons must be frozen immediately and
remain frozen either until the relevant sanction is changed and the obligation to freeze the
assets lifted, or an exemption is granted, or a notice to the contrary is received from the
Ministry of Finance or the supervisory authorities. Until and unless notice is received from
the regulator, keep the funds frozen.

e All hits must be reported to the relevant supervisory authority (De Nederlandsche Bank
[DNB] or the Dutch Authority for the Financial Markets [AFM]).

e The supervisor then assesses the report, and if the hit is confirmed, reports it to the
Ministry of Finance.

Disclosure to Target Party

Sanctions legislation generally does not prohibit financial institutions from telling sanctions
targets that their assets have been frozen. It is more likely that customers would learn that
they no longer had access to their funds when they attempted to access the funds for some
purpose. Credit cards would be declined, deposits would go unmade, accounts would be
blocked, and so on. However, because transactions involving sanctions targets could also
involve AML regulations, financial institutions should have controls in place to maintain
confidentiality around investigations and reporting.

Reporting Requirements for Frozen Assets

Reporting requirements for frozen assets also vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, so it is
critical that all team members at a financial institution be adequately trained in this area. It is
imperative that all regulatory timelines and procedures be respected. Failure to meet these
requirements can result in penalties to the financial institution and charges against
responsible individuals. Besides routine training, itis essential to research and understand the
requirements that apply to the business where assets have been frozen in compliance witha
specific sanctions restriction.

There are two common reporting schedules, and they often exist side by side: initial reporting
requirements, and periodic reporting requirements. Initial reporting occurs immediately at
the time funds are identified and a freeze is activated. This report usually includes providing
the regulatory body with a detailed breakdown of the financial institution’s exposure to the
sanctions target. To prepare this report properly, itis necessary to look up and follow the

CGSS Page 247
Version 1.531
instructions provided by the regulatory authority supervising the institution. OFAC requires
initial reports to be made within 10 business days. Integrated services providers may issue a
report automatically in line with enforceable regulations, but it’s necessary to verify the
accuracy of the document before transmission to the competent authority. A procedure should
be in place in the institution for how to proceed. In case of doubt, or if any clarification is
needed, the appropriate unit in the bank (such as the regulatory liaison office), a unit in the
compliance or legal department, or a specialized unit of the audit and reporting function
should be contacted.

In addition to initial reporting requirements, many jurisdictions require annual or quarterly
reports from the financial institution. OFAC requires annual reports. These reports provide a
summary of the assets the firm is holding in compliance with specific sanctions restrictions
and how the assets have been segregated. As with the initial report, it is necessary to check
with the regulatory authority in the particular jurisdiction to ensure the report meets all of
that jurisdiction’s requirements.

Remember: Reporting requirements are just that—regulatory requirements. Compliance is
mandatory and noncompliance can lead to heavy penalties for the institutions as well as the
employees who are responsible for any noncompliance. Everyone on board needs to be
trained and stay current on reporting requirements.

Managing Frozen Assets

Now that the firm has successfully frozen the sanctions target’s assets, the firm is responsible
for managing those assets in a way that aligns with regulatory requirements. For example,
most jurisdictions allow financial institutions holding frozen assets to add interest to a frozen
interest-bearing account, but some require a license to charge interest to a frozen account that
would normally have interest charged (for example, a loan or credit card)—this is the practice
in the European Union, according to its Best Practices Paper on Sanctions. The European
Union does not require firms to place frozen assets in an interest-bearing account, unlike
OFAC in the United States. Funds frozen under OFAC sanctions must be placed in an interest-
bearing account, and interest is commonly applied at a commercially reasonable rate. In fact,
some financial institutions in the United States (and elsewhere, as permitted) set up
automated systems to apply interest to blocked accounts without any need to remove blocking
controls, even temporarily. Like in many other countries, OFAC provides helpful publications,
insight, and advice on these matters. In those jurisdictions with no requirement to hold frozen
funds in interest-bearing accounts, some financial institutions simply block or freeze the
accounts and make no interest payments until the matter is resolved and the regulatory
authority issues instructions on what interest, if any, is due.

You have learned a bit about managing routine interest payments to frozen accounts; now,
consider how to manage routine fees that might be charged against these funds. In most cases,
financial institutions are legally allowed to debit frozen accounts for normal business charges.
The simplest example might be a checking account that charges a monthly fee; if this account

CGSS Page 248
Version 1.531
were frozen, the bank could still charge the customer the service fee each month. In the
European Union, charges such as these can almost always be deducted without first obtaining
a license, as long as the bank can demonstrate that the charges are commercially reasonable.
As always, the specifics of which charges are permissible and which are not varies from
situation to situation, so it is necessary to research what laws apply in each particular case in
order to manage frozen assets appropriately. OFAC regulations generally allow banks to debit
blocked accounts for normal service charges in accordance with the published rate schedule
for the type of account in question.

MANAGING FROZEN ASSETS: ERRORS, ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTIONS, AND
CHALLENGES

Managing frozen assets is a task requiring special attention, as it must follow a detailed set of
rules and regulations that vary over time and from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Although much
of this work is straightforward, there are a number of common errors, erroneous assumptions,
and challenges. Some of these errors and inaccurate assumptions can be overcome by heeding
the following advice:

e Pay close attention to exactly what type of payment is being credited to an account. For
example, interest is handled differently from dividends.

e Likewise, you should be sure you understand what type of charge is being made against
the account, and whether or not a license (general or specific) is needed.

e You should always make sure you have updated information on a sanction’s restrictions in
relation to the assets that must be frozen, assets that are exempt from freezing, and so on.
New restrictions could be imposed or lifted on short notice; if there is a change in
restrictions, you must make sure you follow the procedure mandated by your regulator.
For instance, if assets owned by one of the customers are no longer subject to a freeze, do
you need to inform the customer, or must you obtain clearance from the regulator of the
jurisdiction first?

e Pay close attention to OFAC’s 50 Percent Rule and the specific application outlined in FAQ
402 of OFAC’s FAQ website. Entities in which the aggregate of one or more blocked
persons’ ownership stakes has dropped to below 50% are not considered blocked under
this rule. If this property comes into the United States or the possession or control of a US
person while the aggregate of one or more blocked persons’ ownership stakes is below
50%, it is not considered blocked. OFAC “urges caution when dealing with or processing
transactions involving such entities, as those entities may become the subject of future
designations or enforcement actions by OFAC. Sufficient due diligence should be
conducted to determine that any purported divestment in fact occurred and that the
transfer of ownership interests was not merely a sham transaction.” Blocked property of
an entity owned 50% or more by a single blocked person that comes within the United
States or within the possession or control ofa US person stays blocked unless OFAC

CGSS Page 249
Version 1.531
authorizes unblocking or other dealings in the property, or OFAC removes the person from
the SDN List. The property stays blocked even if the blocked person’s ownership does later
fall below 50%, because the person is considered to have an interest in the blocked
property. OFAC “does not recognize the unlicensed transfer of the blocked person’s
interest after the property becomes blocked in the United States or in the possession or
control of a US person.” In the case of blocked property of an entity owned 50% or more in
the aggregate by more than one blocked person, it will stay blocked unless OFAC
authorizes the unblocking of or other dealings in the property or removes one or more of
the blocked persons from the SDN List to make aggregate ownership by blocked persons
fall below 50 percent. 123

Unfortunately, the process of freezing assets—and then managing those assets—features
certain built-in operational challenges. These challenges include locating the assets,
determining whether they can be linked to the target, operating with multiple jurisdictions
simultaneously, and shouldering the cost of asset management and maintenance. In some
cases, only a portion of a customer’s assets is subject to freezing, which will require the
segregation of those assets. Consider the following challenges:

e Locating assets and funds belonging directly or indirectly to the sanctions target can be
difficult, especially ifthere are accounts in multiple branches of the firm or accounts held
through complex ownership structures.

e Global organizations use different systems and databases for different products and
service lines.

e Freezing requirements vary across jurisdictions, and in some cases local legislation may
not have the same requirements as other applicable sanctions regimes in other countries.

e Thecost of managing and maintaining frozen assets can be significant. For example, these
expenses could include additional monitoring and reporting staff, technical controls to flag
any attempts to deal in funds, and the time required by the compliance team to identify
and locate assets and report its findings to the proper authorities in the proper manner.

Dealing in Funds

Frozen assets need to be segregated. Asset-freezing restrictions require that the institutions
holding frozen assets not deal in funds. Dealing in funds includes moving, transferring,
altering, using, or accessing funds. It also includes dealing with funds in any way that would
result in any change to their volume, amount, location, ownership, possession, character,

 

123 US Department of the Treasury, OFAC FAQs: General Questions, 2019.

CGSS Page 250
Version 1.531
destination, or other change that would enable the funds to be used, including portfolio
management.

Confiscation, Seizure, and Forfeiture of Assets

Confiscation, seizure, and forfeiture of assets might seem similar to freezing or blocking a
customer’s access to assets, but there are some fundamental differences. As we know, when
assets are frozen or blocked, the target cannot control them while the sanctions are in effect;
however, the target still owns the frozen assets, and once the sanctions are lifted, the target
will be able to access the assets. This is materially different from civil and criminal
confiscation, seizure, or forfeiture of assets.

e Confiscation of assets, which happens after a court order is issued, is generally intended to
permanently deprive someone of the proceeds they have generated through criminal
activity. Unlike placing a freeze on assets, confiscation of assets is not driven by sanctions.

e Seizure of assets happens before a court order is issued. Asset seizures occur when law
enforcement agencies take control of assets they identify as being the proceeds of criminal
activity.

e Civil asset forfeiture, which is similar to asset seizure, is an important tool to help law
enforcement agencies defund organized crime and prevent the commission of new crimes.
In civil asset forfeiture, assets unrelated to the commission of a crime can be taken from
the individual accused of committing a crime.

CASE EXAMPLE: MR. EZZ, 2011

CASE SUMMARY

The interesting case of Mr. Ahmed Ezz, a former member of the Egyptian government under
the Mubarak regime, involved both assets freezing and a confiscation order. The case began in
2011, during the Arab Spring uprisings, when Mr. Ezz was among the individuals named on
sanctions lists by the European Union. Mr. Ezz was suspected of having stolen funds belonging
to the Egyptian government, and the sanctions restrictions required his assets to be frozen.

At the same time, the Egyptian government began taking legal steps to recover the assets that
Mr. Ezz had transferred out of Egypt for his personal benefit. Criminal confiscation
proceedings began in Egypt in an attempt to recover funds Mr. Ezz held in Egypt, Switzerland,
and the European Union. These assets included funds held in bank accounts in each country,
and the order issued by the courts in this case would have prevented Mr. Ezz from accessing
the funds, and sought to remove the assets from Mr. Ezz so that he could no longer access or
use them.

Banks in Switzerland and the European Union had to freeze Mr. Ezz’s assets, while the
Egyptian government simultaneously sought to confiscate Mr. Ezz’s assets in all three

CGSS Page 251
Version 1.531
jurisdictions. Under Article 305 of the Swiss Criminal Code, Switzerland is obligated to freeze
all money that raises suspicions of being laundered. Since 2011, Egypt has asked Switzerland
to freeze the assets of several Egyptians, including former President Hosni Mubarak, his sons,
and his close circle (including Ezz), over charges of corruption and money laundering. At the
time, banks in the European Union had to conform to regulations from both their national
banking supervisors and rules from the EU. A number of jurisdictions, each with its own
powers, were involved, which created a complex situation of overlapping and sometimes
contradictory court decisions.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

> Inearly 2018, at the end ofa complex process, the Swiss authorities handed Egypt 33.8
million Swiss francs ($24.2 million) that were in Ezz’s blocked bank accounts, and the new
Egyptian government dropped the charges against Mr. Ezz. The case was then considered
as settled.

Licenses

As previously stated in the discussion of freezing assets and dealing in funds, some activities
involving frozen assets can be done only with a license. In this section, some key licensing
terms will be defined before we turn our attention to uses of assets that are permissible with a
license and the two main types of license: general and specific.

A license is a written authorization issued by a sanctions regulator that permits an activity
that otherwise might be prohibited or restricted under a particular sanction. The laws or
regulations passed to implement financial sanctions generally include language that allows
otherwise prohibited transactions to take place under specific circumstances.

The main purpose of the licensing system is to strike an appropriate balance between the risk
of assets being used by a sanctions target for restricted activities, and meeting the human
rights or basic needs of sanctions targets, or avoiding unintended economic consequences for
unrelated industries and parties. For example, a license may be requested to allow access to
frozen funds in order to pay for some of the sanctions target’s basic needs, such as food, rent,
legal fees, medical expenses, or other authorized expenses.

An exemption is a specific description of the circumstances under which an otherwise
prohibited activity can be executed under a general license, meaning the persons authorizing
the transactions do not necessarily require approval from the licensing agency beforehand.
The regulations written to enact sanctions restrictions will also describe any exemptions to
those restrictions.

The scope of permitted activities refers to exactly which activities are permitted without a
license, and which are only permitted with a license. A license may stipulate that certain
activities are only permitted during a certain period (from date A to date B) or during
specified seasons. For instance, the import of fuel for heating purposes may only be permitted

CGSS Page 252
Version 1.531
during winter months. The regulations that enact a sanction will outline the grounds and
circumstances under which a license is or is not required. (Do not confuse the scope of
permitted activities with the scope of licensing.)

LICENSING TYPES

There are two types of licenses: general and specific.

General licenses authorize a particular type of transaction for a class of persons without the
need to apply for a license. They are usually posted on the sanctions regulator’s website and
subscribers are notified of its presence. General licenses normally authorize basic-needs
activities such as the provision of legal aid or insurance services. For example, OFAC has
issued one or more general licenses under nearly every one of its economic sanctions
restrictions.

Let’s look at an example from the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom has issued a small number of general licenses under two of its terrorism-
related sanctions restrictions. These sanctions regimes are the Terrorist and Terrorism
Financing under TAFA 2010 and European Council Regulation (EC) No 2580/2001, and the
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda organizations and Council Regulation (EC) No 881/2002. The
general licenses that apply to these two sanctions regimes, and only in the specific
circumstances set out in each license, are:

e Provision of insurance (issuing insurance to a sanctions target)

e Temporary provisions under insurance policies (allowing certain temporary provisions
under insurance policies, such as the use of a courtesy car or providing temporary
accommodation)

e Legal aid (paying lawyers/solicitors who provide legal aid where advice or representation
is sought by the sanctions target)

e Legal expenses paid by a third party (allowing a third party, such as a family member, to
pay money to lawyers/solicitors who may be acting for a sanctions target)

Specific licenses authorize the undertaking of certain specified activities. As is the case with
general licenses, the regulations that impose a sanction will generally describe the types of
activities for which a license is needed, and regulation guidance notes, instructions, and
answers to frequently asked questions provide supplemental information for applicants.
Specific licenses can set very prescriptive requirements.

CGSS Page 253
Version 1.531
A person applying for a specific license must provide adequate evidence to support the
application and demonstrate that all application criteria have been met. The information
required for a specific license often includes the following:

e Identification information on all parties to the proposed transaction, through signed
contract(s)

e Information on any and all financial institutions involved (remitter, correspondent bank,
and beneficiary)

e Identification information on the beneficiary of goods
e Details on the account(s) involved

e Amount ofthe proposed transaction

Remember, of course, that each regulator has slightly different requirements, so it is
imperative that the requirements are checked for every application before submitting it.

Finally, a specific license is not transferable, and is limited to the facts and circumstances
identified in the application. The onus is on the applicant to show that all application criteria
have been met. All other restrictions imposed under the sanction’s regulations remain in full
effect. It is the responsibility of the financial institution to verify that all conditions specified in
the license are met before unfreezing assets.

Now let’s look at two examples of specific licenses. The first program is the “Oil for Food”
program in Iraq. This program was run under the auspices of the United Nations after the first
Gulf War. It enabled Iraqi exports of oil, normally subject to sanctions, to take place, provided
specific conditions were met and the proceeds of the exports were used to finance specified
imports. The program was, in essence, a series of specific licenses. The goal ofthe program
was to pay for food and other necessary items for the population of Iraq, which was suffering
from UN sanctions. In reality, Saddam Hussein abused the program, receiving illegal kickbacks
and income from smuggling oil. There was also widespread fraud on the part of some UN
employees. 124

In the second example of specific license, imagine your bank holds an account for a sanctions
target. The target happens to bea property management company actively managing five
apartment buildings. The sanctions restrictions require that the bank freeze the account of the
sanctions target—but, naturally, there are ongoing expenses that will need to be paid as part
of the ongoing operation of the properties.

Assume the sanctions regulations in this instance allow for a specific license, permitting the
bank to process routine payments, which might include items such as maintenance costs or
paying the utility bills each month. The customer would need to apply for a specific license to

 

124 “What is the controversy over the U.N. Oil-for-Food Program?” Council on Foreign Relations, October
28, 2005.

CGSS Page 254
Version 1.531
allow the bank to continue making these payments from the restricted accounts. The bank
may suggest that the customer apply for the license but will let the customer handle the
license application process. These matters could be fairly technical and will be handled by
specialized firms or lawyers.

Prior to submitting this application, the bank should also ensure it has proper and adequate
controls in place to monitor these transactions and verify that the payments being processed
are, in fact, being applied to the correct expenses. The institution will have specific policies
and procedures in place for working with funds that are the subject of a specific license.

LICENSING AUTHORITIES

Each country has at least one designated sanctions regulator who controls sanction-related
licensing for that country. Many countries have more than one sanctions regulator. For
example:

e In France, sanctions are handled by a specialized office of the Direction générale du Trésor
which is part of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. This office issues both general and
specific licenses.

e Inthe Netherlands, the Central Import and Export Office (CDIU) is responsible for issuing
export and dual-use goods licenses, as well as licenses for other restricted items.

e Inthe United Kingdom, the relevant regulator is the Office of Financial Sanctions
Implementation (OFSI).

e Inthe United States, the Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC) and the US Department of
Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) are both responsible for licensing
activities. OFAC is the designated administrator of the sanctions regime and licenses; BIS
would intervene for strategic and defense considerations. Most licenses would be issued
by OFAC.

Each of the authorities listed above will generally have published guidance—or at least
answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs)—on how to complete license applications. Be
sure you always know the licensing regulator and the process of applying for a license in your
jurisdiction.

SCOPE OF LICENSING

In general, it is necessary to apply for a license from the regulatory body in the jurisdiction in
which the target’s frozen funds are held. If funds are also paid to a recipient outside of that
jurisdiction, it might be necessary to apply for a license in the recipient’s jurisdiction as well.

To make the scope of licensing discussion clearer, look at a fictional example. Imagine a bank
is holding frozen assets for a customer who wants to transfer funds from the bankto a
recipient outside the jurisdiction. The first step is to verify the exact nature of the sanctions

CGSS Page 255
Version 1.531
that affect the customer and apply for a license from the regulator in the bank’s country, as
this is where the funds are being held.

Assume the application is successful, and the license is granted. This license only authorizes
the bank to move funds up toa specified aggregate amount out of the jurisdiction in which it
operates. The license does not authorize the receipt of the transferred funds by the bank or
third party outside the “home” jurisdiction. The recipient must also apply for a license to
receive funds belonging to the sanctions target (assuming the target is also a sanctions target
in the “destination” country).

It is common practice for a remitter bank to ask to see evidence from the beneficiary bank or
third party that they have, in fact, been issued a license allowing them to receive funds from
the sanctions target. Note that this is true even within the European Union, so it cannot be
assumed, for example, that an EU sanction covering all Member States only requires a single
license in order for frozen funds to be paid from one Member State to another. Transferring
funds always requires a careful review to ensure full compliance with all applicable
regulations, and transfers between Member States of the European Union are no exception.

LICENSES: ERRORS, ERRONEOUS ASSUMPTIONS, AND CHALLENGES

Licensing is detail-driven and complicated. As with any complex subject, the potential for
making a mistake somewhere along the way is fairly high. By examining some of the common
errors, erroneous assumptions, and challenges of licenses now, you will be better equipped to
avoid them in the future:

e Confusion regarding who is responsible for obtaining a license is one of the most common
sources of errors made in licensing. Sometimes, more than one party needs to apply for
and obtain a license for a single transaction, as seen in the last example.

e Intandem with this confusion is a frequent lack of understanding of the scope of activities
covered by a license. The importance of paying careful attention to the activities that fall
within the scope of restrictions cannot be overstated.

e Itis assumed that all customers involved in trade activities will have confirmed that the
activity is legitimate and which, if any, licenses are required by all parties in the supply
chain.

These are just a few of the most common licensing mistakes to avoid. The following tips offer
sound strategies on overcoming many of licensing’s most common operational challenges:
e Understand who needs to have a license. This includes your own financial institution.

e Itis necessary to understand which activities can be licensed, and which cannot. This
knowledge enables you to verify whether or not a license is valid and covers the full scope
of goods or activities that might be undertaken.

CGSS Page 256
Version 1.531
e The requirements and information about licensing published by sanctions regulators
varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Never assume the information needed for a license
application in one country will be the same as an application in a different country.
Similarly, never assume the process of applying for a license to manage frozen funds is
going to be the sameas the process for applying for a license to export restricted goods;
they are very different.

e The global nature of trade and transport activities means that there will often be more
than one jurisdiction requiring a license. The documentation for each of these licenses can
be complex, and documenting multiple licenses is more complex still.

e There is the ever-present possibility of forgery and the potential of being unable to
authenticate documents provided by customers.

It is your responsibility to make sure you keep informed of developments in regulations and
restrictions that may affect your customers. Most employers offer regular training or refresher
courses in matters of security and compliance; be sure to take advantage of any such
opportunities for continuing education.

Consequences of Noncompliance

Researching, documenting, compiling, and submitting license applications to any number of
jurisdictions and in any number of situations might seem like an onerous task—but
compliance is essential, and it’s the law. It is a serious offense to conduct prohibited activity
without a license, or to fail to comply with any condition included ina license. It is also an
offense to knowingly or recklessly provide false information or documents in an effort to
obtain a license. If errors are discovered, the license will be revoked and the customer, the
financial institution that processed the application, and its employees might be subject to
penalties and possible criminal prosecution.

Now we will step back and take a broader view of licenses and what relevance they have to
customer due diligence and ongoing monitoring. Consider the following questions:

e How might you use your customer due diligence processes to identify whether there are
customers or activities that might require a license?

e What policies, procedures, and controls does your firm have in place to mitigate the risk of
dealing with frozen assets without first ensuring a specific license?

e What measures does your firm use to monitor activities performed under a general or
specific license to ensure they are done in compliance with any license conditions or
requirements?

CGSS Page 257
Version 1.531
CASE EXAMPLE (HYPOTHETICAL): SYRIA PROPERTY LTD.

Let’s review the case of Syria Property Ltd. as an example ofa bank’s requirement to freeze
assets and apply for a license.

Syria Property Ltd. is a real estate management company incorporated in the United Kingdom,
and is a customer of UK Bank PLC. Syria Property Ltd. is a UK-incorporated subsidiary of Syria
Finance Ltd., which is an entity incorporated in Syria. Syria Finance Ltd. is controlled by Syrian
president Bashar al-Assad and his family, and is a potential source of funding for his regime.

Syria Property Ltd. is a designated person pursuant to Council Regulation (EU) No 100/2011
[fictitious] of March 2, 2011 concerning restrictive measures in view of the current situation in
Syria.

Now, consider some of the pertinent facts about Syria Property Ltd.’s operation:

e Syria Property Ltd. has a portfolio of properties rented out to businesses or individuals,
and it receives regular rental income from these properties.

e Thecompany has to pay operating costs on the properties, such as maintenance expenses,
salary payments to its employees, utility bills, and taxes.

e Syria Property Ltd. also holds a number of business accounts with UK Bank PLC. These
accounts have significant balances from which payments are made daily.

The next step is to compare the factors just listed to the restrictions in the applicable sanctions
regulation. Council Regulation (EU) No 100/2011 [fictitious] imposes the following sanctions
restrictions:

e Anarms embargo and a ban on equipment used for internal repression operations

e Freezing of funds and economic resources of certain persons including Bashar al-Assad
and his family and entities involved in serious human rights abuses against persons in
Syria

e Freezing all funds and economic resources belonging to or owned, held, or controlled by
listed natural or legal persons

Furthermore, the sanction requires that no funds or economic resources shall be made
available, directly or indirectly, to or for the benefit of the listed persons.

Finally, it is necessary to work through the following five questions. Please read each question
and give some thought to how you would answer each one.

1. Does UK Bank PLC have an obligation to freeze Syria Property Ltd.’s funds held in the
bank’s accounts?

2. Ifthere is an obligation for UK Bank PLC to freeze the funds, is the bank permitted to
process any payments?

CGSS Page 258
Version 1.531
3. Does a lawyer or specialist for UK Bank PLC have to apply for a license to permit Syria
Property Ltd. to continue its business and payments as usual?

4. Ifa lawyer or specialist for UK Bank PLC were to apply for a license, what would the
license seek to cover?

5. What controls and due diligence must UK Bank PLC undertake on Syria Property Ltd.’s
counterparties to ensure that it is not circumventing the prohibitions and is compliant
with the regulation?

Take a few minutes to form a response to each question, and then the answers will be
reviewed. As they are reviewed, notice which aspects you remembered, and which ones you
may have left out of your responses.

1. Does UK Bank PLC have an obligation to freeze Syria Property Ltd.’s funds held in the
bank’s accounts?

Yes. Because Syria Bank Ltd. is listed under the regulation, the bank is obligated to freeze
Syria Property Ltd.’s assets. Even though Syria Property Ltd. is a property management
company and is not involved in dealing with the type of equipment listed in the regulation,
it is still named as a listed entity, so the freezing requirement applies.

2. Ifthere is an obligation for UK Bank PLC to freeze the funds, is the bank permitted to
process any payments?

No. Although UK Bank PLC can credit interest to the accounts, it cannot make any other
payments. Even though Syria Property Ltd. is an operating business and conducts various
transactions with a range of suppliers, tenants, and local authorities—none of whom are
involved in the prohibited activities—none of these transactions can be processed without
a license.

3. Does UK Bank PLC have to apply for a license to permit Syria Property Ltd. to continue its
business and payments as usual?

No, Syria Property LTD must apply for the license and then provide the license to their
bank. There is no obligation for UK Bank PLC to apply on their behalf.

4. IfUK Bank PLC were to apply for a license, what would the license seek to cover?

UK Bank PLC would seek a specific license that would allow it to process a range of
payments for Syria Property Ltd., permitting the processing of a range of payments
through its accounts. These could include payments under employment contracts, travel
expenses for employees and directors, payments to UK authorities, national insurance,
receipt of rent, routine property maintenance, and insurance of buildings.

5. What controls and due diligence must UK Bank PLC undertake on Syria Property Ltd.’s
counterparties to ensure that it is not circumventing the prohibitions and is compliant
with the regulation?

CGSS Page 259
Version 1.531
UK Bank PLC should use enhanced due diligence (EDD) to monitor the Syria Property Ltd.
accounts and related activities closely. This could include manual screening to check each
payment that goes out of or comes into Syria Property Ltd.’s accounts, to ensure each
transaction fits under the parameters set in the license. The bank could also conduct a KYC
search for each of Syria Property Ltd.’s counterparties sending or receiving payments from its
accounts. A professional service provider generally can be located through a basic internet
search. Where this is not possible, the bank will need to reach out to Syria Property Ltd.
directly for background information.

Lastly, the bank should check the conditions of the license, as the bank might also be required
to provide the sanctions regulator with detailed period reports and bank statements for all
accounts. Similarly, the conditions might prohibit any payments outside of the United
Kingdom.

Delisting

There are cases in which a designated individual or entity can be removed froma sanctions
list. This is called delisting. Once the sanction-imposed restrictions are lifted from a target, the
target’s name is generally, but not always, removed from the list of sanctions targets.

In 2006, the UN adopted the Focal Point for Delisting. According to the UN, this is “part of its
commitment to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for placing individuals and entities
on the sanctions lists, and for removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.” 125 Individuals and entities, except for those on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda
sanctions list, may petition for removal from the UN sanctions list through the Focal Point
process or through their state of residence or citizenship. The Focal Point then reviews and
makes a decision as to whether to grant the request for de-listing. The process itself can take
many months as the Focal Point coordinates with the governments involved in the
designation, residence, and citizenship of the petitioner to make a determination as to
whether the facts submitted support delisting. Facts for delisting may include, among other
circumstances, that the person or entity does not merit inclusion on the list or their inclusion
is a case of mistaken identity.

For entities on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda sanctions list, they must submit their petitions
for delisting through the Office of the Ombudsperson.

There are three primary ways in which a person can be delisted, other than being
automatically delisted when the sanctions are removed. The first two are natural: by death (if
the target is an individual) or by legal dissolution (if the target is an entity). Perhaps
surprisingly, death or dissolution does not universally result in the target’s name being
immediately removed from the sanctions list. In some jurisdictions, information about the

 

125 United Nations Security Council, “Focal Point for Delisting.”

CGSS Page 260
Version 1.531
target might be maintained on the published list of targets of a particular sanction. This is
done to help investigators cross-reference and discover matches between new targets and
known targets that no longer exist. In the case of a known target’s death, there could be an
estate with assets that could be subject to sanctions and or other restrictions or obligations,
including the payment of taxes.

An example of natural delisting that includes both death and dissolution can be found in the
UN sanctions entry for Congomet Trading House in the Republic of Congo. The UN entry reads,
“No longer exists as a gold trading house in Butembo, North Kivu. Congomet Trading House
(formerly listed as Congocom) was owned by Kisoni Kambale (deceased on 5 July 2007 and
subsequently de-listed on 24 April 2008).” The listing also describes the owner’s activities in
the region (“Kambala acquired almost all the gold production in the Mongbwalu district, which
was controlled by the FNI [Front des nationalistes intégrationnistes, an armed militia group
with a significant history of brutal attacks on civilians]”), which could be valuable information
in other investigations. 126

The third way to be delisted is by request by the target. This generally happens via a written
application sent from the target to the authority that imposed the restrictions, or to a local
authority who has been designated to address such applications. As usual, each jurisdiction
has slightly different processes for requesting a delisting. Let’s look at some of the key points
for the United Nations, European Union, and United States next.

UN SANCTIONS

To request delisting as a target of sanctions imposed by the United Nations, the target must
make a petition to a designated UN Focal Point for Delisting. Petitions can also be made to a
target party’s jurisdiction of residence or jurisdiction of citizenship. The process is similar
whether the target seeks to have assets unfrozen or a travel ban lifted. Petitioners who are
listed on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda Sanctions List must submit their delisting requests
through the Office of the Ombudsperson to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaeda Sanctions
Committee.

EU SANCTIONS

Targets listed by the European Union can apply to be delisted directly to the EU General Court,
but only for autonomous sanctions (those imposed by the European Union), and only when
the listing criteria is no longer met. Additionally, the European Union reviews its sanctions list
periodically, and can decide to delist targets on its own initiative.

 

126 United Nations Security Council, “Congomet Trading House.”

CGSS Page 261
Version 1.531
US SANCTIONS

In the United States, a target can request removal from the SDN list by filing a petition through
an administrative (rather than court) process. In contrast, removal from the BIS list of denied
parties (targets subject to US trade restrictions) happens only when the prohibition itself
expires. However, people on this list can apply to be delisted from other lists generated by the
BIS.

OTHER JURISDICTIONS

With country-level sanctions around the world, each jurisdiction will have a specified process
for handling delisting requests and appeals. In the United Kingdom, for instance, sanctions
targets file an appeal to the High Court.

The rules concerning the administration of sanctions in Asia vary from country to country. In
Japan the process is generally handled by CISTEC (Center for Information on Security Trade
Control), an agency related to the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), but
depending on the type of goods considered, other agencies could be involved. Singapore
implemented the Strategic Goods (Control) Act or SGCA to regulate the trade in strategic
goods and strategic goods technology and Singapore Customs has been designated as the
entity in charge of administering the SGCA. In China a new law enacted in March 2019 is likely
to alter the process of sanctions administration. Thus, you should seek specialized legal advice
based on the jurisdictions where the contemplated transactions are expected to occur.

HOW DELISTING IMPACTS YOUR KYC AND ONGOING MONITORING

Imagine you have just been notified that one of your listed customers has been delisted. What
do you do now? Before simply wiping the slate clean, pause to think about how information
about delisted parties might be relevant to other investigations. How should that information
be used for a new customer who has been delisted? What should be done if this new customer
says she is a designated target, but that she is appealing the decision? Is the fact that a listed
target has filed an appeal reason enough to accept her as a new customer?

Let’s walk through a hypothetical example to get a better understanding of the situation.

You have just received a new account application for a customer named Laura Mertz Moroz.
You begin research and find her name on a list of sanctions targets. Ms. Moroz confirms that
she is the person identified on the list. She explains that she was only added to the list because
her ex-husband was listed because of his business activities in Belarus. Ms. Moroz is now
divorced, and she is confident her petition to be delisted will be resolved satisfactorily “any
day now.”

Should you accept this customer as a client? If she is listed on the OFAC list, would your firm
need to file a report with OFAC?

CGSS Page 262
Version 1.531
The answer to the first question is clearly NO. The reasons should not be a surprise at this
point:

e You have no evidence that Ms. Moroz has actually submitted her petition to be delisted
with the proper authority.

e You do not know whether the customer still has connections to other sanctioned persons,
which could elevate the firm’s risk level.

e You have no evidence that the authority has agreed to delist her.

e The reason Ms. Moroz is listed is irrelevant in deciding whether to open an account for
her; the fact that she is currently listed is sufficient reason to decline her application.

e Inaddition, she may represent a high risk that, by policy, the bank does not want to
assume.

Regarding the question of whether you will need to file an OFAC report, the question is also
NO. You have not done anything other than screen Ms. Moroz—you haven’t approved her
application or processed any transactions—there is no reason to submit a report to OFAC.
However, to be on the safe side, you may want to check with your legal or regulatory relations
department if a suspicious activity report (SAR) or other reports may need to be filed with
bank regulators, as a designated person could be the object ofa criminal investigation.

Management and Reporting Obligations

Management and reporting obligations pertaining to sanctions targets and frozen assets vary
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, as well. In general, though, all documents regarding frozen
assets must be kept for a period of five years from the date the funds were released.

REPORTING IN THE EUROPEAN UNION

Different countries’ requirements for what information needs to be reported vary a bit more,
but the European Union is fairly standard in the following requirements:

e Reports must include all the information that guided the firm in its decision, all
information held by financial institutions about the sanctions target by which the person
can be identified, and the nature and quantity of any economic resources held by the
financial institution for the sanctions target.

e Frozen assets and blocked funds must be reported without delay—usually within a brief
timeframe. A firm’s IT systems will generate a report that could be relayed to the
supervising authorities.

CGSS Page 263
Version 1.531
e Frozen funds must be segregated but are not required to be placed in an interest-bearing
account.

e Customers may apply to the competent supervising agency for the release of blocked
funds.

REPORTING IN THE UNITED KINGDOM

The United Kingdom, like the European Union, has its own regulatory authority and its own
set of reporting rules. Here, reports must be made if you have reasonable cause to suspect that
a breach ofa sanctions has occurred, or that a party you dealt with is a designated person. The
behavior of banks and other financial institutions is also held to a high standard: businesses
must self-report when they suspect or know that they have violated a sanctions restriction.
Assets that are frozen or blocked must be reported to the relevant authority as well, and all
reporting must be done as soon as reasonably possible.

REPORTING IN THE UNITED STATES

According to OFAC’s regional reporting requirements, businesses are encouraged to
voluntarily disclose past violations, and self-disclosure is a mitigating factor in OFAC’s
response to past violations. This type of self-disclosure is in the form ofa detailed letter
accompanied by any and all supporting documentation. Blocked or rejected funds must be
reported within 10 business days of the day they are blocked or rejected.

A FINAL NOTE ABOUT REPORTING

All the details needed to write and file various reports in any jurisdiction should be available
from those jurisdictions. Additionally, the firm’s own policies and procedures around
sanctions compliance and reporting should be readily available. But there’s another, more
fundamental, concept to keep in mind about the reporting process: perhaps the most
important takeaway message on this topic is that a business should never try to internally
manage cases in which it has identified funds belonging to a sanctions target or realized it has
violated a sanctions restriction. These instances need to be promptly reported to the
appropriate institutions to avoid the appearance of impropriety. Make sure that all steps in an
investigation are recorded and keep copies of search results and internal memos relative to
each case, as such documents may be required in the future. The sooner these events are
reported to the proper authorities, the better.

CGSS Page 264
Version 1.531
Appendix

Guidance Documents and Reference
Material

 

This section cites several CGSS Examination supporting documents and reference materials. It
also suggests websites and periodicals that offer additional supporting material. Several
international bodies that are focused on sanctions/CFT have published valuable guidance
documents and reference materials that are helpful in preparing for the CGSS Examination.

For study purposes, the reference documents generally have an introduction, putting the
material in context and providing background as to why the government or body is taking
action, for example, to control the proliferation of military weapons. Often the material will
then provide the regulatory framework and obligations that the framework imposes.

The Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) are particularly helpful as these highlight areas of
sanctions compliance that are traditionally problematic for firms. For example, within OFAC’s
FAQs there are various examples of companies that are SDNs having different levels of
ownership in another company and whether the facts in the example would lead to the
company of interest being blocked. Additionally, on May 2, 2019, OFAC published A
Framework for OFAC Compliance Commitments. It is suggested that this material be studied
and included with other material to build a solid foundation for future learning and growth in
the area of sanctions compliance.

Guidance Documents and Reference Material

e United Nations: http://www.un.org

- Sanctions Committee Information

Subsidiary Organs of the United Nations Security Council: FACT Sheets (2019)

United Nations Security Council Consolidated List

International Atomic Energy Agency
e European Union: https://europa.eu
- EU's Service for Policy Instruments

- EU Sanctions Map

CGSS Page 265
Version 1.531
- Frequently Asked Questions on EU Restrictive Measures (Sept. 2014)

- Sanctions: How and When the EU Adopts Restrictive Measures, including links to:

Guidelines on the implementation and evaluation of restrictive measures
(sanctions)

Best practices for the effective implementation of restrictive measures
Basic principles on the use of restrictive measures (sanctions)

Political and Security Committee (PSC)

e United States: https://www.usa.gov

- Office of Foreign Assets Control: https://home.treasury.gov/

e Bureau

A Framework for OFAC Compliance Commitments
Frequently Asked Questions

Sanctions List Search

Sanctions Programs and Country Information
Consolidated Sanctions List Data Files

Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List
311 Actions

FinCEN: Special Measures for Jurisdictions, Financial Institutions, or International
Transactions of Primary Money Laundering Concern

of Industry and Security: https://www.bis.doc.gov/

e =Licensing

e Consolidated Screening List

e United Kingdom: https://www.gov.uk

e Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation

e Financial Sanctions Guidance (Mar. 2018)

e Financial Sanctions Targets by Regime

CGSS
Version 1.531

Page 266
Consolidated List

Import and Export Controls

e = ©Australia: https://www.australia.gov.au

Sanctions

Consolidated List

e = Canada: https://www.canada.ca/en.html

Current Sanctions Imposed by Canada
Consolidated Canadian Autonomous Sanctions List
Export and Import Controls

Frequently Asked Questions

e Financial Action Task Force: https://www.fatf-gafi.org/

Mutual Evaluation Reports
High-Risk and Other Monitored Jurisdictions

International Best Practices: Targeted Sanctions Related to Terrorism and Terrorist
Financing (Recommendation 6)

e The Wassenaar Arrangement: https://www.wassenaar.org/

Frequently Asked Questions
List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies and Munitions List

List of Advisory Questions for Industry (adopted 2003; revised 2018)

e Wolfsberg Group: www.wolfsberg-principles.com

CGSS

Wolfsberg Guidance on Sanctions Screening (issued January 2019)

Page 267

Version 1.531
Glossary

Alert

A review based on underlying red flags that requires analyst attention. Within know-
your-customer procedures, alerts are potential discrepancies that are flagged, either
manually or through an automated system, based on defined red flags and underlying
typologies. Within sanctions screening, an alert is a hit, or multiple hits, of an internal
record checked against sanctions screening lists. If they cannot be resolved easily as
false positives, alerts generally result in investigations.

Asset

Anything an individual or legal entity owns that has a monetary value. Fixed assets are
those items, such as buildings and equipment, that will be used over a period of time;
current assets include raw materials, cash, and any money other parties owe to the
individual or legal entity.

Asset blocking

The practice of removing an individual or legal entity’s access to assets during or as
the result of an investigation into a sanctions violation. Asset blocking is also referred
to as freezing an asset.

Asset confiscation

The practice of taking ownership of an individual or legal entity’s assets during or as
the result of an investigation into a sanctions violation.

Asset flight

The illegal practice of moving assets from one jurisdiction to another for the purpose
of avoiding fines, confiscation, or other penalties.

Asset forfeiture

Similar to asset seizure, asset forfeiture is an important tool to help law enforcement
agencies defund organized crime and prevent the commission of new crimes. In civil
asset forfeiture, assets unrelated to the commission of a crime can be taken from the
individual accused of committing a crime.

CGSS Page 268
Version 1.531
Asset freezing

The prevention of a person targeted by sanctions from accessing or using his or her
bank account or other financial assets. Asset freezing is also referred to as blocking an
asset.

Asset mingling

The illegal practice of purchasing assets, such as real estate properties, using a blend
of legal and illegal funds as a means of making matches more complicated.

Asset seizure

see asset confiscation

Asset structuring

see structuring

Automated screening tool (AST)

Software systems used by large financial institutions to facilitate the screening
process, as opposed to manual screening. In general, ASTs are designed to screen
against sanctions lists. ASTs generate hits against sanctions lists that may be
consolidated into alerts based on, for example, a customer record. For one customer
record there may be multiple hits against sanctions lists that are consolidated under
one alert.

Autonomous sanctions

A single entity, whether a government or a coalition of governments, such as the EU,
acting to implement and enforce a sanctions regime. See unilateral sanctions.

Back-to-back letters of credit

A form of financing in which Bank A issues a letter of credit as collateral to Bank B in
order to issue a separate letter of credit to the beneficiary. This often happens when
the underlying agreement between the applicant and beneficiary contains restrictions
about the credit quality of the bank that is issuing the letter of credit, the location of
the issuing bank, or other stipulations that prevent the applicant’s bank from issuing a
direct letter of credit to the beneficiary. A sanctions evader can use a back-to-back
letter of credit to remove the name of a sanctioned bank from the documentation.

Batch screening

CGSS Page 269
Version 1.531
The process of screening a firm’s entire customer base and other associated entities,
such as vendors, with ASTs on a periodic basis.

Beneficial owner

The term “beneficial owner” has two different definitions depending on the context:

e The natural person who ultimately owns or controls an account through which a
transaction is being conducted

e The natural people who have significant ownership of, as well as those who exercise
ultimate effective control over, a legal person or arrangement

CGSS Page 270
Version 1.531
Bill of exchange

A shipping document that shows the means by which exporters are paid for the goods
that are to be shipped, including information such as the names of the exporter,
importer, issuing bank, and the bank where the funds will be drawn.

Bill of lading

A required document that a carrier issues as a receipt of cargo. It includes the type and
quantity of cargo, as well as the destination.

Blacklist

An internal list of names (including places, persons, entities, and individuals) that are
screened to identify any sanctions exposure, in addition to government and vendor-
maintained sanctions lists. Other potential additions to a firm’s internal blacklist may
come from OFAC advisories and other warnings that list entities that did not merit
being placed on the SDN list, but are still considered high risk. The FATF blacklist is a
list of countries that FATF has determined are noncooperative in the international
fight against money laundering and terrorist financing.

Block

See asset freezing

Blockade

The deployment of military resources by land, air, or sea, by a country or coalition to
prevent the movement of goods or people into or out of a targeted country.

Boycott

A punitive withdrawal from business or social engagement with a government,
organization, or individual as a sign of protest.

Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)

A section of the US Department of Commerce responsible for ensuring that trade
sanctions are properly understood, implemented, and enforced in the United States.
Among other tasks, the BIS regulates the import and export of sensitive, dual-use, and
controlled goods and materials. The mission statement of the BIS is: “Advance US
national security, foreign policy, and economic objectives by ensuring an effective
export control and treaty compliance system and promoting continued US strategic
technology leadership.”

CGSS Page 271
Version 1.531
Compliance

An action or state of adhering to a set of legislation, regulations, rules, policy,
specifications, or understood norms.

Comprehensive sanctions

Sanctions that prohibit all transactions and activity with a sanctioned country by the
sanctioning country except in rare, specific instances.

Consolidation of goods

A method of sanctions evasion in which a person or organization either groups small
shipments into one larger shipment or mixes restricted items in with other goods and
does not declare those restricted items in shipping documentation.

Control effectiveness

The measurement of the quality of controls used to mitigate a business’ inherent risks
(also referred to as mitigation measures or quality of risk management). These
controls should be both appropriate and effective to mitigate the identified sanctions
risks. That is, they must be proportionate. Where there is an elevated risk, the controls
should be more comprehensive to mitigate that risk.

Correspondent banking

The provision of banking services by one bank (the correspondent bank) to another
bank (the respondent bank). Large international banks typically act as correspondents
for hundreds of other banks around the world. Respondent banks may be provided
with a wide range of services, including cash management (e.g., interest-bearing
accounts in a variety of currencies), international wire transfers of funds, check
clearing services, payable-through accounts, and foreign exchange services.

Counterparty

The other side of a transaction—the seller where one’s customer is the buyer, or vice
versa.

Cross border

Used in the context of activities that involve at least two countries, for example, when
wiring money from one country to another or taking currency across a border.

Customer due diligence (CDD)

CGSS Page 272
Version 1.531
A set of internal controls that enable a financial institution to establish a customer's
identity, predict with relative certainty the types of transactions in which the
customer is likely to engage, and assess the extent to which the customer exposes it to
a range of risks (i.e., money laundering and sanctions). Organizations also need to
know their customers through CDD to guard against fraud and comply with the
requirements of relevant legislation and regulation. Effective CDD programs also help
to protect banks’ reputation and the integrity of banking systems by reducing the
likelihood of banks becoming a vehicle for or a victim of financial crime. As such, they
constitute an essential part of sound risk management.

Customer relationship

The primary defense against sanctions evasion. A customer relationship encompasses
any and all contact with a prospective customer. This includes dialogue that takes
place during onboarding and conversations that occur as the customer uses the
financial institution’s products and services. People in the financial institution’s
management, marketing, operations, and compliance departments may take part in
this communication.

Database, third-party

Third-party databases can be a good source of both primary and secondary
information sources. Examples of third-party databases include rating agencies, stock
exchanges, and legal databases. The information provided by third-party databases
can be helpful but should never stand on its own.

Dealing in funds

The practice, which must be avoided, of a financial institution moving, transferring,
altering, using, or accessing funds it has frozen. Dealing in funds also includes
interacting with funds in any way that would result in any change to their volume,
amount, location, ownership, possession, character, or destination, or any change that
would enable the funds to be used, including portfolio management. Asset-freezing
restrictions require that the frozen assets must be segregated.

Decision tree

Five-question process for determining which alerts can reasonably be discounted, and
which others warrant an investigation.

Delisting

CGSS Page 273
Version 1.531
The process of removing a sanctions target from a list after the restrictions imposed
on them have been removed.

Delivery channels

The ways in which products and services are provided by a firm to its customer (also
referred to as servicing methods and distribution channels). For example, reliance
upon brokers, intermediaries, and other independent third parties poses a higher
sanctions risk than when a business interacts directly with customers and suppliers.
The absence of face-to-face onboarding presents a higher risk than when customers
are onboarded directly or through a domestic affiliate. Other delivery channels
without face-to-face onboarding, such as internet banking and money services
businesses, are also considered to pose a higher inherent sanctions risk. A delivery
channel that processes payments quickly is also a higher risk.

Denied Persons List (DPL)

A list, published by BIS, of individuals, entities, or companies that have been denied
export privileges, most commonly because they have violated the Export
Administration Act. American companies and individuals are forbidden from entering
any export dealings with any person or entity on the DPL.

Dilution of sanctioned ownership

Complex ownership structures involving multiple entities in different jurisdictions can
reduce the percentage of a business that is owned by a sanctioned party so that it falls
below thresholds which would prevent trade. This dilution allows a sanctioned
country or entity to avoid the restrictions the sanctions create.

Dollar clearing

The process of converting clients’ payments from a foreign currency into US dollars.

Dual control

A principle whereby at least two employees are required in order to complete an
internal control task. The purpose of dual control is to protect against internal fraud
and prevent internal control failure at a single point. Also referred to as “maker-
checker” or “four-eyes.”

Dual-use goods

CGSS Page 274
Version 1.531
The products or technology that can be used for either military or civilian purposes.
Most often, in diplomatic and political platforms, these are goods that can serve
multiple uses at one time. An example is missile technology, which can be used for
both scientific research and military action.

Due diligence

The investigation and examination of a company or group, conducted in the process of
preparing for a business transaction. Due diligence should be completed before
entering into any financial transaction or business relationship.

Economic sanctions

The imposition of trade or financial restrictions and penalties by one or more
countries against another country, entity, or individual with the purpose of changing a
behavior. Economic sanctions can include actions such as tariffs, trade restrictions,
and financial limitations.

Electronic funds transfer (EFT)

The movement of funds between financial institutions electronically. The two most
common electronic funds transfer systems in the US are FedWire and CHIPS. (SWIFT
is often referred to as the third EFT system, but in reality it is an international
messaging system that carries instructions for wire transfers between institutions,
rather than the wire transfer system itself.)

Embargo

An official government action to ban trade or commercial activity with a specific
country, sometimes involving a specific trade product (e.g., a grain embargo or an oil
embargo).

Embezzlement

The unlawful act of taking or misappropriating funds entrusted by an employer or
organization for one’s own use.

End-user certificate

A shipping document used to certify that a buyer is the final recipient of the materials
and is not planning to transfer the materials to another party.

Evasion

CGSS Page 275
Version 1.531
The act of avoiding or circumventing sanctions to engage in prohibited activity
without being caught.

Event-triggered monitoring

An internal control used to mitigate sanctions risks. Event-triggered monitoring
occurs whenever relevant information about an existing customer (e.g,, its jurisdiction
of operation) changes, therefore requiring an interim review of information prior to a
scheduled review.

Exclusions list

A list of names that are excluded from the screening process. These are names that the
compliance team has verified do not actually match a name on a sanctions list.
Exemption

See license

Export Administration Regulations (EAR)

A set of regulations administered and enforced by the Bureau of Industry and Security,
a division of the US Department of Commerce. They apply specifically to physical
goods or commodities such as technology, software, and other items subject to export
controls.

Export Control Joint Unit (ECJU)

A UK-based agency responsible for administering licenses for export controlled goods
(military and dual-use) that might otherwise be involved in an embargo.

External evasion

When a customer or its third party violates sanctions without the cooperation or
knowledge of internal staff.

Extraterritorial jurisdiction

A state making, applying, and enforcing laws, regulations, and other rules of conduct in
respect to persons, property, or activity beyond its territory. The US is the primary
government engaged in applying extraterritoriality to its sanctions regime. The EU,
believing that the practice of extraterritoriality violates international law, does not

allow for the concept of extraterritoriality in relation to the sanctions restrictions it
imposes.

CGSS Page 276
Version 1.531
Facilitation

Actions taken by one person to assist or support another person in engaging in
activity. Within a sanctions context, facilitation means when one person (person A)
who is not allowed to engage in an activity either directly or indirectly assists or

supports another person (person B) to engage in that activity. The activity does not
necessarily need to be prohibited for person B, but only for person A.

False negative

Either (1) a hit that is identified during the screening process as a possible alert, but is
dismissed, when in fact there is a match to a target named on a sanctions list; or (2)
screened activity that would have generated a hit if the screening process had been
calibrated to catch such activity, such as a target match that is unidentified because
thresholds are too high.

False positive

A hit identified during the screening process as a possible alert, but when reviewed, is
found not to be a match to a target named on a sanctions list.

Final Rule Part 504

Regulations issued by the New York State Department of Financial Services (DFS) on
June 30, 2016, to emphasize the need for sound transaction monitoring and filtering
programs (TMPs). The Rule went into effect on January 1, 2017, requiring regulated
institutions to maintain TMPs reasonably designed to monitor transactions after their
execution for compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and AML laws and regulations and
prior to their execution for compliance with the US treasury department’s Office of
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC). The regulation includes suspicious activity reporting
requirements and prevention of unlawful transactions with targets of economic
sanctions administered by OFAC.

Financial Action Task Force (FATF)

CGSS Page 277
Version 1.531
FATF was chartered in 1989 by the Group of Seven industrial nations to foster the
establishment of national and global measures to combat money laundering. It is an
international policy-making body that sets anti-money laundering standards and
counterterrorist financing measures worldwide. Its recommendations do not have the
force of law. Thirty-five countries and two international organizations are members. In
2012, FATF substantially revised its 40+9 Recommendations and reduced them to 40.
FATF develops annual typology reports showcasing current money laundering and
terrorist financing trends and methods.

Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)

A bureau of the United States Department of the Treasury that collects and analyzes
information about financial transactions in order to combat domestic and
international money laundering, terrorist financing, and other financial crimes.

First line of defense

Within the governance structure of a sanctions compliance program, the first line of
defense (also referred to as the “front line”) includes relationship managers and other
customer-facing employees who are closest to the customers and counterparties
during the onboarding and contracting phase of relationships. The first-line defense is
responsible for ensuring that adequate information is obtained so that effective
screening of customers and their owners and controllers can be performed. In general,
the first-line defense owns and manages the collection of SDD information.

Foreign sanctions evader (FSE)

A foreign individual or entity determined to have violated, attempted to violate,
conspired to violate, or caused a violation of US sanctions. OFAC publishes a list of
FSEs, and transactions by US persons or within the United States involving FSEs are
prohibited.

Free trade zone (FTZ)

CGSS Page 278
Version 1.531
Also known as special economic zones, FTZs are delimited geographic areas within a
country with zone management that provides infrastructure and services to tenant
companies. In FTZs, the rules for doing business are different and promoted by a set of
policy instruments that are not generally applicable to the rest of the country. FTZs
constitute a key risk area specific to trade-related activities because they commonly
have inadequate sanctions safeguards; minimal oversight by local authorities; weak
procedures to inspect goods and legal entities, including appropriate record-keeping
and information technology systems; and lack of cooperation between FTZs and local
customs authorities.

Front company

Any business set up and controlled by another organization. While front companies
are not necessarily illicit, criminals use them to launder money by giving the funds the
appearance of legitimate origin. Front companies may subsidize products and services
at levels well below market rates or even below manufacturing costs.

Fuzzy logic

A matching technique used by financial institutions to increase the effectiveness of the
screening processes by overcoming problems such as flawed records and databases.
Fuzzy logic is accomplished through algorithms that use “degrees of similarity” to
determine the probability that two names are the same. Fuzzy logic can find matches
in misspelled names, incomplete names, and names with different spellings but similar
sounds or phonetics. In addition, fuzzy logic accepts different formats for date of birth
and other inconsistencies. Although fuzzy logic increases the likelihood of identifying
potential target matches, it can also increase the number of false positives.

Globalization

Globalization refers to the integrating of national economic, trade, and communication
operations by businesses engaging in international trade. Globalization generally
includes the enlarging of national perspectives to international and interdependent
perspectives of society. It advocates a freer transfer of goods and services, as well as
assets, across national and international boundaries. It is believed that globalization
may limit the effectiveness of sanctions because a globalized market makes it easier to
replace and reroute trade channels.

Governance

CGSS Page 279
Version 1.531
Governance is the allocation of power and decision-making authority among the board
of directors and management to establish internal controls for the purposes of
managing risk and compliance with laws, regulations, and internal policies.
Governance may include systems of checks and balances and a responsibility for
leadership and organization.

Greylist

A greylist is a list of entities that are suspicious or higher-risk for causing a negative
impact to a firm. Within the context of sanctions, the greylist includes the names of
countries with strategic deficiencies in anti-money laundering and counterterrorism
financing regimes. Moreover, these countries have also not made sufficient progress or
otherwise committed to action plans to address deficiencies identified by FATF.

Hit

A potential match or name match during the sanctions screening process that
indicates a possible sanctioned person.

Human rights

The fundamental rights of humans which are conceived to be “inherent to all human
beings regardless of race, sex, nationality, ethnicity, language, religion, or any other
status.” Human rights are considered irrepressible by government. The UN Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948 to protect the social, cultural,
financial, and political rights of individuals. Among the human rights covered by the
declaration are the right to life, liberty, education, and equality under law. The
declaration also sets human protections that are the basis of many modern national
constitutions, such as the freedom to assemble and the right to free speech, to
religious freedoms, and to other liberties. No country is bound to abide by human
rights standards, yet the standards serve as a guide for human independence, interest,
and protection.

Identifier

Type of information about a sanctions target that is recorded on a sanctions list, for
example, name, date of birth, jurisdiction, national identification number, entity with
which a target is linked, information about penalties imposed against a target,
registered legal address, and website URL. Identifiers apply to both individuals and
legal entities.

Inequalities list

CGSS Page 280
Version 1.531
A list of words or names that automated screening tools often mistake as matches and
thereby create potential matches to targets named on sanctions lists. These are words
or names that the organization’s compliance team has checked and confirmed do not
actually match up, such as Andrew and Andrea. An addition to an inequalities list will
apply the inequality to all future screened instances and decrease the likelihood ofa
future match. Therefore, inequalities lists should have sufficient controls (at least dual
controls) for additions to the list and periodic review.

Inherent risk

The level of sanctions risks that exists before controls are applied to mitigate them.
There are four main inherent risk categories: customers, products and services,
countries, and delivery channels. Inherent risk is linked to the risk assessment
process, which evaluates the effectiveness of an institution’s risk controls. Inherent
risk considers the likelihood and impact of noncompliance prior to considering any
mitigating effects of risk management processes.

Internal evasion

When an organization’s own staff members commit or facilitate a sanctions violation.
Examples include the following:

e Whena staff member either fails to apply or overrides internal controls to circumvent
transaction monitoring tools

e When a staff member uses client accounts to conceal the origin of funds

CGSS Page 281
Version 1.531
Investigation

The process of obtaining, evaluating, recording, and storing information about an
individual or legal entity with whom one is conducting business, in response to an
alert indicating a possible sanctions violation. Investigations often begin with simple
checks before progressing to further investigation such as account review, customer
outreach, and possible escalation to the compliance function.

Isolation company

A company that helps evaders avoid the appearance of involvement of either a
sanctioned entity or an entity that is trying to do business with a sanctions target.
Evaders choose an isolation company either for its past business activities or its lack of
traceable connection to the entities involved in the evasive activity.

Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPOA)

A detailed agreement with five annexes reached by Iran and the P5+1 (China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States) on July 14, 2015. The
nuclear deal was endorsed by UN Security Council Resolution 2231, adopted on July
20, 2015. Iran’s compliance with the nuclear-related provisions of the JCPOA is
verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) according to certain
requirements set forth in the agreement. On May 8, 2018, President Trump announced
that the United States would withdraw from the JCPOA and reinstate US nuclear
sanctions on the Iranian regime.

Jurisdiction of citizenship

The country (or countries, in the case of dual citizenship) in which an individual is a
legal citizen.

Jurisdiction of residence

The country in which an individual resides most of the time; the country in which an
individual lives in his or her primary residence.

Kleptocrat

A corrupt leader who exploits the people and resources of a state for personal gain.

Know your customer (KYC)

CGSS Page 282
Version 1.531
Anti-money laundering policies and procedures used to determine the true identity of
a customer and the type of activity that is normal and expected, and to detect activity
that is unusual for a particular customer.

Letter of credit

A credit instrument issued by a bank that guarantees payments on behalf of its
customer to a third party when certain conditions are met.

License

A written authorization issued by a sanctions regulator that permits an activity that
otherwise might be prohibited or restricted under a particular sanction. The laws or
regulations passed to implement financial sanctions generally include language that
allows otherwise prohibited transactions to take place under specific circumstances,
whether via a general or specific license. A general license is an exemption that all
persons may transact under—an example would be transacting for purposes of
humanitarian aid. A specific license is an exception for the applicant of the license and
establishes the circumstances in which the applicant may transact if the license is
granted.

Limited Liability Company (LLC)

A specifically defined type of business in the United States, in which personal liability
is separated from corporate liability. LLCs are especially popular in high-risk
businesses, as the individuals (owners, directors, etc.) associated with such ventures
seek to avoid personal accountability for corporate debts or lawsuits.

Look-back (or look-back review)

The process of looking back at a customer’s transaction activity over a specific time
period in the past. Look-back reviews of past transactions can help verify a customer’s
actual activity and provide “red flags” by identifying transactions that might indicate
links to sanctions targets, jurisdictions, or restrictions.

Mandatory sanctions lists

Supranational sanctions lists, such as those including targets designated by the United
Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR), which must be screened against.
Depending on the country in which a business is located and operates, local sanctions
regimes may be required (i.e, mandatory) and would need to be included within a
firm’s sanctions compliance program.

CGSS Page 283
Version 1.531
Mirror trades

A type of trade that involves buying securities in one currency and then selling
identical ones in another currency.

Money laundering

The process of concealing or disguising the existence, source, movement, destination,
or illegal application of illicitly derived property or funds to make them appear
legitimate. It usually involves a three-part system: placement of funds into a financial
system; layering of transactions to disguise the source, ownership, and location of the
funds; and integration of the funds into society in the form of holdings that appear
legitimate. The definition of money laundering varies in each country where it is
recognized as a crime.

Multilateral sanctions

Multilateral sanctions are restrictions supported by more than one country or entity.
These can be imposed by allies against a common enemy or for the purpose of
realizing a greater economic and punitive impact.

Mutual evaluation report (MER)

Reports giving an in-depth description and analysis of a country’s systems for limiting
financial crimes based on FATF recommendations. While the reports are not sanctions,
they have the potential to influence the risk a financial institution will take when
dealing with a particular country or region.

Name screening

The process of matching an internal record (i.e., customer, counterparty, related
account party) against a sanctioned list record, either manually or through an
automated screening tool. Name screening may also include batch name screening,
which allows a firm to screen its entire customer base using automatic screening tools
on a periodic basis. When onboarding new customers, name screening against
sanctions lists is undertaken prior to accepting a new customer relationship, and it is
done in real time. Name screening forms a part of entry controls, which give the
financial institution more opportunities to collect SDD information.

Naming conventions

CGSS Page 284
Version 1.531
The ways in which an individual’s name is given to or used by him or her. Names can
be presented in many ways, largely dependent upon the country or cultural norms of
the country where the individual was born or raised.

Nested account

The use of a bank’s correspondent relationship by a number of underlying banks or
financial institutions through their relationships with the correspondent bank’s direct
customer. The underlying respondent banks or financial institutions conduct
transactions and obtain access to other financial services without being direct
customers of the correspondent bank.

Nesting

The practice where a respondent bank provides downstream correspondent services
to other financial institutions and processes these transactions through its own
correspondent account. The correspondent bank is thus processing transactions for
financial institutions on which it has not conducted due diligence. Although this is a
normal part of correspondent banking, it requires the correspondent bank to conduct
enhanced due diligence on its respondent’s AML program to adequately mitigate the
risk of processing the customer’s customers’ transaction.

Nominee director or shareholder

Person who is not the actual director or shareholder of a company but who is
appointed to act on behalf ofits directors or shareholders. Although the use of
nominee shareholders is also in rapid decline, the use of nominee directors is still
common.

Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)

The UN Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was signed in 1968 and
went into effect in March 1970. The NPT solidified the commitment of signing
countries to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. Its goal was to minimize the risk
of the use of nuclear weapons in conflict, which could result in significant destruction.
Likewise, the NPT sought to keep the weapons out of the hands of rogue nations and
terrorists.

Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC)

CGSS Page 285
Version 1.531
The agency within the US Department of the Treasury responsible for administering
and enforcing economic sanctions issued as part of US foreign policy and by
international organizations like the United Nations against targeted foreign countries.
It often works in consultation with other agencies, such as the Department of State, to
oversee national security goals. A core component of the agency’s responsibilities is
the creation and maintenance of the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list.

Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI)

The primary agency regulating financial institutions in Canada.

Partial match

A result generated by an AST. A partial match means the entity being screened is
similar enough to the sanctioned entity based on fuzzy logic and potentially other
identifying factors, such as date of birth. Partial matches require further human
intervention to determine whether the match is a target match (or true match), ie.,
whether the name being screened is the same entity as the sanctioned target.

Pass-through sanctions risk

The incorrect assumption that the sanctions risks associated with a customer’s
affiliates or subsidiaries is simply a problem for the customer to assess and manage.
Regulators in the United Kingdom and United States require all parties within a
transaction chain to check for possible sanctions risks. It is important for financial
institutions to ask for and review information about a customer’s affiliates and
subsidiaries.

Payment screening

A method of screening that focuses on screening payment messages. Unlike name
screening, payment screening takes place with current customers and is performed
before a payment or message is processed. Payment screening relies on payment
messages using predefined templates, codes, and acronyms to describe certain
information. The information provided in these predefined templates is typically
provided by a third party; therefore, the firm has little, if any, control over how the
data is presented.

Payments, cross border

Payments that involve more than one country, whether by physically transporting
cash across an international border, or by transferring money electronically from one
country to another.

CGSS Page 286
Version 1.531
Real Time Gross Settlement Systems (RTGS)

International wire transfers use RTGS within a given jurisdiction. In RTGS, money or

securities are transferred between banks on a “real time” and “gross” basis, meaning

that payment transactions are not subject to a waiting period, and each transaction is
settled on a one-on-one basis.

Reasonable cause (to suspect)

In the United Kingdom, in the absence of definite knowledge of wrongdoing, a firm
must have reasonable cause to suspect that it is in possession of, or controlling the
economic assets of, a designated person. Reasonable cause to suspect is defined as a
set of circumstances from which an honest and reasonable person should have
inferred knowledge or formed the suspicion of wrongdoing.

Red flag

A warning signal that should bring attention to a potentially suspicious situation,
transaction, or activity.

Register, corporate

A corporate register is a listing of key information about the company, such as when a
corporation was formed and who its owners and directors are. Corporate (or
company) registers are often publicly available on the company’s website or websites
maintained by professional associations or entities, such as chambers of commerce or
legal databases. In the United States, the secretary of state for each state and the
District of Columbia maintains an online register for corporations doing business in
that state.

Reporting requirements, initial and periodic

Initial reporting and periodic reporting often exist side by side. Initial reporting occurs
immediately when funds are identified and a freeze or reject is activated; this report
usually includes providing the regulatory body with a detailed breakdown of the
financial institution’s exposure to the sanctions target. In addition, many jurisdictions
require annual (as is the case for OFAC) or quarterly reports from the financial
institution about blocked assets. These reports provide a summary of the assets the
firm is holding in compliance with specific sanctions restrictions and how the assets
have been segregated.

Reputational risk

CGSS Page 287
Version 1.531
The potential that adverse publicity regarding a financial institution’s business
practices and associations, whether accurate or not, will cause a loss of confidence in
the integrity of the institution. Banks and other financial institutions are especially
vulnerable to reputational risk because they can become a vehicle for, or a victim of,
illegal activities perpetrated by customers. Such institutions may protect themselves
through Know Your Customer and know-your-employee programs.

Respondent bank

A bank for which another financial institution establishes, maintains, administers, or
Manages a correspondent account.

Restrictive measures

see sanctions

Risk appetite

The amount of risk that a firm is willing to accept in pursuit of value or opportunity. A
firm’s risk appetite reflects its risk management philosophy and comfort level for
undertaking business in situations in which there could be an elevated sanctions risk.
In turn, risk appetite influences the firm’s culture and operating style and guides
resource allocation. An organization’s risk appetite is determined through the risk-
assessment process and formalized in a Risk Appetite Statement or Framework. A
business should determine its risk appetite based on the resources it has to invest in
controls, staffing, and measures to protect its reputation. Firms can have an
overarching risk appetite (i.e., enterprise-wide) and/or have risk appetites defined on
a more granular level (e.g., by department).

Risk assessment

A tool that allows a business to identify and assess the extent to which it may be
exposed to risks. In global banking, risk assessments form the foundation of a sound
sanctions compliance program. The key purpose of a risk assessment is to drive
improvements in financial crime risk management by identifying the general and
specific sanctions risks a financial institution is facing; the ways in which these risks
are mitigated by a firm’s sanctions compliance program controls; and any additional
controls to mitigate the residual risk that remains for the institution. A well-planned
and well-formulated risk assessment allows a business to understand its risk profile
and then determine its risk appetite for undertaking business in situations in which
there could be an elevated sanctions risk.

CGSS Page 288
Version 1.531
Romanization

The process of taking a different writing system (i.e., one that often does not use the
Latin A-Z alphabet) and converting it into Latin script—that is, converting writing into
the script that languages, such as English, are written in today. Some scripts do not
have equivalent letters or symbols; as a result, there can be variations in the spelling
of names and words, even when they’re written in the standard alphabet.

Sanctions

Sanctions are punitive or restrictive actions taken by individual countries, regimes, or
coalitions with the primary purpose of provoking a change in behavior or policy.
Sanctions can restrict trade, financial transactions, diplomatic relations, and
movement. They can be specific or general in their implementation and enforcement.
Sanctions are also referred to as restrictive measures.

Sanctions compliance

The act of adhering to the sanctions-related legislation, regulations, rules, and norms
that make up the complex sanctions landscape.

Sanctions compliance officer (SCO)

Within the second line of defense in the governance structure ofa sanctions
compliance program, the SCO is responsible for ongoing monitoring for sanctions
compliance, including sample testing and a review of exception reports, to enable the
escalation of identified non-compliance or other issues to senior management and,
where appropriate, the board. The SCO is the contact point for all sanctions-related
issues for internal and external authorities and is responsible for reporting suspicious
transactions. To enable the successful oversight of the sanctions compliance program,
the SCO must have sufficient independence from the business lines to prevent conflicts
of interest and unbiased advice and counsel.

Sanctions compliance program (SCP)

CGSS Page 289
Version 1.531
A program run by a firm to comply with regulator expectations concerning sanctions
compliance and to manage the firm’s sanctions risk. OFAC encourages organizations
subject to US jurisdiction to use a risk-based approach to sanctions compliance by
developing, implementing, and regularly updating SCPs. SCPs follow a similar
methodology to that adopted by anti-money laundering compliance programs.
According to OFAC, the five essential components of an SCP are (1) management
commitment; (2) risk assessment; (3) internal controls; (4) testing and auditing; and
(5) training.

Sanctions due diligence (SDD)

A similar process to Know Your Customer (KYC) / Customer Due Diligence (CDD) that
focuses on the risks specific to sanctions, taking into account governance and risk
assessment. SDD builds upon the KYC/CDD information an organization collects as
part of its existing AML program. SDD is applied throughout the life cycle of a
relationship at the start of a relationship (i.e., onboarding); when new products are
introduced, in response to trigger events during a relationship, such as a “match”
generated by a screening tool; during periodic reviews; and when a relationship ends.

Sanctions evasion

The deliberate attempt to remove or conceal the involvement of sanctioned places,
entities, or individuals in a transaction or series of transactions. When sanctions
evasion is successful, a business that would have been flagged, taxed, restricted, or
prohibited is allowed to proceed unhindered.

Sanctions list

A document or database listing individuals, legal entities, and countries with whom it
is illegal to do business.

Sanctions regime

A set of sanctions that have a common nexus or theme. These are either referred to by
the issuer of the set of sanctions or by the intended purpose of the set of sanctions. For
example, the “OFAC sanctions regime” or the “North Korea sanctions regime.”
Depending on the context, a sanctions regime may be limited to unilateral sanctions or
may include multilateral sanctions.

Scope of licensing

CGSS Page 290
Version 1.531
Details on which activities are permitted with the license in question. For example, if a
firm is managing frozen assets for a customer and it needs to transfer some of the
customer’s assets to a business (for example, a creditor with a legitimate claim), the
firm needs to determine whether, and under what circumstances, the license allows
this activity.

Scope of permitted activities

Details on exactly which activities are permitted without a license under a sanction,
and which are only permitted with a license. A license may stipulate that certain
activities are only permitted during a certain period of time or during specified
seasons.

Screening tools

See automated screening tools (ASTs)

Second line of defense

The sanctions compliance function, the larger compliance function, and the human
resources and technology departments comprise the second line of defense within the
governance structure of a sanctions compliance program. The sanctions compliance
officer ensures ongoing monitoring for sanctions compliance to enable the escalation
of identified issues. In general, the second line exists to ensure that SDD procedures
and processes applied by the first line are designed properly, firmly established, and
applied as intended. The second-line defense reviews the effectiveness of controls
used to mitigate sanctions risks; provides information to the first line; and investigates
possible noncompliance with sanctions restrictions.

Sectoral sanction

A newer form of restriction focused on targeting key entities and sectors of a country’s
economy. They prohibit certain types of transactions with certain people or entities in
the targeted country within a targeted sector of the economy. Sectoral sanctions are
very dependent on facts and context when applied.

Sectoral Sanctions Identification list (SSI list)

A list of those targeted by sectoral sanctions. The SSI list is not part of the Specially
Designated Nationals (SDN) list. However, individuals and companies on the SSI list
may also appear on the SDN list. Note that the SDN list is very broad, and the SSI list
against Russia is very narrow.

CGSS Page 291
Version 1.531
Selective sanctions

See targeted sanctions

Sham divestment

A transaction in which a sanctions target sells assets or equity to close associates or
other affiliated persons. These can include friends, colleagues, subordinates, business
partners, and family members. Similar to using an isolation company, the idea is that
the sanctions target no longer appears to “own” the assets or shares in a company.
However, the target continues to influence or control the asset or the company’s
operations.

Shelf company

A company that has been created months or years ahead of time, often by a law firm or
an accounting firm. Then the company goes “on the shelf” until needed. Some investors
use these shelf companies, or “aged” companies, to gain a clean business record.

Shell company

A company without active business or significant assets. Shell companies are legal, but
people sometimes use them illegitimately—for instance, to disguise business
ownership.

Simple checks

One of the first steps in an investigation, simple checks are those initial actions taken
to discount or confirm a sanctions link; an example of a simple check includes
comparing data about a sanctions target with a firm’s Know Your Customer (KYC)
data.

Smart sanctions

see targeted sanctions

Sources, primary

Sources of information that provide direct evidence about a sanction or a sanctions
target. Examples of primary sources include sanctions instruments, sanctions lists,
trade activity lists, and transaction activity.

Sources, secondary

CGSS Page 292
Version 1.531
Sources created “after the fact” that report on, analyze, or collect information that has
already appeared in primary source documents. If there is a discrepancy between
primary sources and secondary sources, it is a red flag that deserves, at minimum,
further investigation in order to clarify the discrepancy. Examples of secondary
sources include corporate registers, third-party databases, and media publications.

Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons list (SDN list)

A list of individuals and companies, published by OFAC, that are owned, controlled by,
or acting on behalf of a targeted country. The list also includes groups and people, such
as terrorists or drug traffickers, who are associated with a specific crime as opposed to
a country. The US Department of the Treasury maintains the list and may name a
person or company as an SDN. When the government identifies a person or company
as an SDN, it blocks their assets and forbids US persons to do business with them. The
government may also impose fines and imprison lawbreakers. Also, individuals may
lose their export privileges. The US government may put the person or business on a
list of blocked, denied, or debarred individuals and institutions.

Straw man

A non-sanctioned person with a low public profile who acts for or stands in the place
of a sanctions target, also called a “front man.” The straw man does not act in any real
sense as an owner or controller. Instead, he or she carries out activities at the
direction of the sanctions target, who is active in the background.

Strict liability
The principle that an organization is liable even if it did not intend to violate or

knowingly violate a sanction. Organizations are also liable even if they have robust
sanctions compliance programs in place.

String matching

An algorithm for efficient searching that involves finding occurrence(s) of a pattern
string within another string or body of text. Also referred to as pattern matching, this
method can be used to recognize social security numbers, telephone numbers, zip
codes, and any other information that follows a specific pattern. It is also useful for
looking for information that follows leading text and then extracting the text that
comes after it, as well as reprocessing documents. This algorithm works by reading
through text strings to match patterns.

Stripping

CGSS Page 293
Version 1.531
Stripping involves omitting or removing key information, such as the sender’s name or
the business name, from a payment message to avoid detection. It may happen with or
without the knowledge of other participants in the transaction. When a wire transfer
travels through multiple parties before reaching the intended final destination, there
are multiple opportunities for information to be abbreviated, omitted, or altered. For
this reason, most jurisdictions have enacted laws that require payments to contain
certain “basic” information, including the sender’s and the recipient’s name and
address. When a wire originates from a sanctioned entity or location, and the intent is
to deliver it within the United States or European Union, where restrictions would
ordinarily flag the payment and block it, sanctions evaders have an incentive to
remove the information that would trip the system.

Structuring

Illegal act of splitting cash deposits or withdrawals into smaller amounts, or
purchasing monetary instruments, to stay under a currency reporting threshold. The
practice might involve dividing a sum of money into lesser quantities and making two
or more deposits or withdrawals that add up to the original amount. Money
launderers use structuring to avoid triggering a filing by a financial institution. The
technique is common in jurisdictions that have compulsory currency reporting
requirements.

SWIFT message

SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications) provides a
messaging network that financial institutions use to securely transmit information and
instructions. The network works through a standardized system of codes in which
each member organization is assigned a unique code that has either 8 or 11
characters. The SWIFT messaging system sends payment orders that must be settled
by correspondent accounts that the member institutions have with one another.

Target match

Identification of a party as matching one named on a sanctions list. It is also referred
to as a true match and results from sanctions screening.

Targeted sanctions

CGSS Page 294
Version 1.531
Sanctions against a specific target, generally with a goal of a specific outcome.
Targeted sanctions can be in the form of financial or trade restrictions focused on
restricting movement, and they can be applied unilaterally by one country or
multilaterally by many countries. Targeted sanctions are also referred to as smart
sanctions.

Terrorist financing

The process by which terrorists fund their operations in order to perform terrorist
acts. There are two primary sources of financing for terrorist activities. The first
involves financial support from countries, organizations, or individuals. The other
involves a wide variety of revenue-generating activities, some illicit, including
smuggling and credit card fraud.

Third line of defense

The third-line defense within the governance structure of a sanctions compliance
program is the internal audit, which involves independent reviews of the controls
applied by the first two lines of defense. It independently evaluates the risk
management and controls of the bank through periodic assessments, including the
adequacy of the bank’s controls to mitigate the identified risks. It also evaluates the
effectiveness of the staff's execution of the controls, the effectiveness of the
compliance oversight and quality controls, and the effectiveness of the training.

Threshold calibration

A method of adjusting the thresholds within the algorithms in an automated screening
tool to match a financial institution’s greatest areas of sanctions risk. A threshold is
typically described as a percentage, and it controls the generation of alerts. Threshold
calibration reflects the updating and reconfiguration of algorithms based on emerging
trends, an institution’s internal investigations, external information, and channels of
financial crime activity developing and changing over time. (See false negative and
false positive.)

Toll gates

The various parties that form the payment chain. Payment messages pass through toll
gates and can change in the process.

Trade finance

See letter of credit

CGSS Page 295
Version 1.531
Transaction monitoring and filtering programs (TMPs)

Programs required of financial institutions under the New York State Department of
Financial Services (DFS) Final Rule Part 504 to monitor transactions after their
execution for compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and AML laws and regulations. It
includes requirements for suspicious activity reporting as well as for monitoring
transactions prior to their execution to prevent unlawful transactions with targets of
economic sanctions administered by OFAC. Filtering programs may be manual or
automated, and must be reasonably designed for the purpose of interdicting
transactions that are prohibited by OFAC.

Transliteration

The conversion of text from one script into another—for example, a document written
in Arabic characters that is converted into Cyrillic script. This phenomenon can
present a name screening challenge.

Transshipment

The shipment of goods through intermediate countries, sometimes involving transfer
from one vessel to another, before reaching an intended destination. Transshipment
sometimes happens to avoid blockades at the ports of entry for sanctioned regimes or
to hide the identity of the country of origin at the destination location. Transshipment
is prohibited by some governments and entities.

Ultimate beneficial owner (UBO)

See beneficial owner

Unilateral sanctions

These are sanctions imposed by a single country against a targeted entity. These are
generally considered less effective than multilateral sanctions. Still, they serve to
target specific offensive practices on behalf of imposing nations. As an example, the
Magnitsky Act allows for unilateral, global sanctions to be imposed on human rights
offenders. Assets can be frozen, and offenders may be barred from entering the US.
Another example occurred in the 1980s when Australia autonomously banned
shipments of uranium to France. With few exceptions (for example, the European
Union), these are often referred to as autonomous sanctions.

United Nations (UN)

CGSS Page 296
Version 1.531
An international organization that was established in 1945 by 51 countries committed
to preserving peace through cooperation and collective security. Today, nearly every
nation in the world belongs to the UN. The United Nations contributes to the fight
against organized crime with initiatives such as the Global Program against Money
Laundering (GPML), the key instrument of the UN Office of Drug Control and Crime
Prevention in this task. Through the GPML, the UN helps Member States to introduce
legislation against money laundering and to develop mechanisms to combat this
crime. The program encourages anti-money laundering policy development, monitors
and analyzes the problems and responses, raises public awareness about money
laundering, and acts as a coordinator of joint anti-money laundering initiatives with
other international organizations.

United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR)

Numbered resolutions issued by the United Nations that describe sanctions. An
example is UNSCR 1368, unanimously adopted on September 12, 2001, to combat
terrorist threats to international peace and security.

USA PATRIOT Act

The Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-56). Enacted on
October 26, 2001, this historic US law brought about momentous changes in the anti-
money laundering field, including more than 50 amendments to the Bank Secrecy Act.
Title III of the act, the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-Terrorist
Financing Act of 2001, contains most, but not all, of its anti-money laundering-related
provisions.

U-turn payment

A payment in which a bank or other institution from country A sends a transaction
through a bank in country B using an offshore bank. In the financial world, U-turn
payments are most commonly known in relation to US sanctions—particularly to
those imposed on Iran.

Weak alias

OFAC defines a weak alias, or “weak AKA,” as a broad alias that could generate a
number of false hits.

Whitelist

CGSS Page 297
Version 1.531
A list of individuals and entities whose characteristics trigger a hit or alert by an AST
(automated screening tool), but who are found not to be a match to a sanctions list.
Some ASTs allow users to attach supplementary information that supports the
conclusion that this person or entity is not a sanctions target and warrants inclusion
on the whitelist.

Willful blindness

Legal principle that operates in money laundering cases in the US and is defined by
courts as the “deliberate avoidance of knowledge of the facts” or “purposeful
indifference.” Courts have held that willful blindness is the equivalent of actual
knowledge of the illegal source of funds or of the intentions of a customer in a money
laundering transaction.

Wire transfer

Electronic transmission of funds among financial institutions on behalf of themselves
or their customers. Wire transfers are financial vehicles covered by the regulatory
requirements of many countries in the anti-money laundering effort.

CGSS Page 298
Version 1.531
