DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Office of Foreign Assets Control

31 CFR Part 501

Economic Sanctions Enforcement
Guidelines

AGENCY: Office of Foreign Assets
Control, Treasury.

ACTION: Final rule.

 

SUMMARY: The Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) of the U.S. Department
of the Treasury is issuing this final rule,
“Economic Sanctions Enforcement
Guidelines,” as enforcement guidance
for persons subject to the requirements
of U.S. sanctions statutes, Executive
orders, and regulations. This rule was
published as an interim final rule with
request for comments on September 8,
2008. This final rule sets forth the
Enforcement Guidelines that OFAC will
follow in determining an appropriate
enforcement response to apparent
violations of U.S. economic sanctions
programs that OFAC enforces. These
Enforcement Guidelines are published
as an Appendix to the Reporting,
Procedures and Penalties Regulations.
DATES: This final rule is effective
November 9, 2009.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Elton Ellison, Assistant Director, Civil
Penalties, (202) 622-6140 (not a toll-free
call).

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Electronic Availability

This document and additional
information concerning OFAC are
available from OFAC’s Web site
(hitp://www.treas.gov/ofac) or via
facsimile through a 24-hour fax-on-
demand service, tel.: (202) 622-0077.

Procedural Requirements

Because this final rule imposes no
obligations on any person, but only
explains OFAC’s enforcement policy
and procedures based on existing
substantive rules, prior notice and
public comment are not required
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(A). Because
no notice of proposed rulemaking is
required, the provisions of the
Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C.
chapter 6) do not apply. This final rule

is not a significant regulatory action for
purposes of Executive Order 12866.

Although a prior notice of proposed
rulemaking was not required, OFAC
solicited comments on this final rule in
order to consider how it might make
improvements to these Guidelines.
OFAC received a total of 11 comments.

The collections of information related
to the Reporting, Procedures and
Penalties Regulations have been
previously approved by the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) under
control number 1505-0164. A small
adjustment to that collection was
submitted to OMB in order to take into
account the voluntary self-disclosure
process set forth in the Guidelines. An
agency may not conduct or sponsor, and
a person is not required to respond to,
a collection of information unless it
displays a valid control number
assigned by OMB. This collection of
information is referenced in subpart I of
Part I, subpart G of part III and subpart
B of part V of these Guidelines, which
will constitute the new Appendix to
part 501. The referenced subparts
explain that the voluntary self-
disclosure of an apparent violation to
OFAC will be considered in
determining the appropriate agency
response to the apparent violation and,
in cases where a civil monetary penalty
is deemed appropriate, the penalty
amount. As set forth in subpart B of part
V of the Guidelines, an apparent
violation involving a voluntary self-
disclosure will result in a base penalty
amount at least 50 percent less than the
base penalty amount in similar cases
that do not involve a voluntary self-
disclosure. This provides an incentive
for persons who have or may have
violated economic sanctions laws to
voluntarily provide OFAC information
that it can use to better implement its
economic sanctions programs. The
submitters who will likely seek to avail
themselves of the benefits of voluntary
self-disclosure are businesses, other
entities, and individuals who find that
they have or may have violated a
sanctions prohibition and wish to
disclose their actual or potential
violation.

The estimated total annual reporting
and/or recordkeeping burden: 1,250
hours. The estimated annual burden per
respondent/record keeper: 10 hours.
Estimated number of respondents and/
or record keepers: 125. Estimated
annual frequency of responses: Once or
less, given that OFAC expects that
persons who voluntarily self disclose
their violations will take better care to
avoid future violations.
57594 Federal Register / Vol.

74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

Background

The primary mission of OFAC is to
administer and enforce economic
sanctions against targeted foreign
countries and regimes, terrorists and
terrorist organizations, weapons of mass
destruction proliferators, narcotic
traffickers, and others, in furtherance of
U.S. national security, foreign policy,
and economic objectives. OFAC acts
under Presidential national emergency
powers, as well as specific legislation, to
prohibit transactions and block (or
“freeze’”’) assets subject to U.S.
jurisdiction. Economic sanctions are
designed to deprive the target of the use
of its assets and to deny it access to the
U.S. financial system and the benefits of
trade, transactions, and services
involving U.S. markets, businesses, and
individuals. These same authorities
have also been used to protect certain
assets subject to U.S. jurisdiction and to
further important U.S. nonproliferation
goals.

OFAC administers and enforces
economic sanctions programs pursuant
to Presidential and statutory authorities.
OFAC is responsible for civil
investigation and enforcement of
economic sanctions violations
committed by Subject Persons, as
defined in the Guidelines. Where
appropriate, OFAC may coordinate its
investigative and enforcement activities
with federal, state, local and/or foreign
regulators and/or law enforcement
agencies. Active enforcement of these
programs is a crucial element in
preserving and advancing the national
security, foreign policy, and economic
objectives that underlie these initiatives.
Among other things, penalties, both
civil and criminal, are intended to serve
as a deterrent to conduct that
undermines the goals of sanctions
programs.

On January 29, 2003, OFAC
published, as a proposed rule, generally
applicable Economic Sanctions
Enforcement Guidelines, as well as a
proposed Appendix to the Cuban Assets
Control Regulations (CACR) providing a
schedule of proposed civil monetary
penalties for certain violations of the
CACR (Cuba Penalty Schedule). Though
this proposed rule was not finalized,
OFAC used the generally applicable
guidelines set forth therein as a general
framework for its enforcement actions
and the Cuban Penalty Schedule as a
framework for the imposition of civil
monetary penalties for the violations of
the CACR described therein. On January
12, 2006, OFAC published, as an
interim final rule, Economic Sanctions
Enforcement Procedures for Banking
Institutions, which withdrew the

January 29, 2003, proposed rule to the
extent that it applied to banking
institutions, as defined in the interim
final rule.

On October 16, 2007, the President
signed into law the International
Emergency Economic Powers
Enhancement Act (Enhancement Act),?
substantially increasing the maximum
penalties for violations of the
International Emergency Economic
Powers Act (IEEPA),? a principal
statutory authority for most OFAC
sanctions programs. The increased
maximum penalty amounts set forth in
the Enhancement Act, as well as its
application to pending cases involving
apparent violations of IEEPA, prompted
the development of new Guidelines for
determining an appropriate enforcement
response to apparent violations of
sanctions programs enforced by OFAC,
and, in cases involving civil monetary
penalties, for determining the amount of
any civil monetary penalty.

On September 8, 2008, OFAC
published an interim final rule (73 FR
51933) setting forth Economic Sanctions
Enforcement Guidelines as enforcement
guidance for persons subject to the
requirements of U.S. sanctions statutes,
Executive orders, and regulations. The
Guidelines set forth in the interim final
tule superseded the enforcement
procedures for banking institutions set
forth in the interim final rule of January
12, 2006, which was withdrawn, as well
as the proposed guidelines set forth in
the proposed rule of January 29, 2003,
which was also withdrawn, with the
exception of the Cuba Penalty Schedule.
(Those withdrawn enforcement
procedures and guidelines continue to
apply to the categories of cases
identified in, and as provided in,
OFAC’s November 27, 2007 Civil
Penalties—Interim Policy and OFAC’s
October 28, 2008 Civil Penalties—
Revised Interim Policy, both of which
are available on OFAC’s Web site,
hitp://www.treas.gov/ofac. Those
Interim Policies provide that the
withdrawn enforcement procedures
generally apply to cases (a) in which a
Pre-Penalty Notice was mailed before
October 16, 2007, when the
Enhancement Act became law; (b)
where a tentative settlement amount
had been communicated and
memorialized; (c) where a party agreed
to a tolling or waiver of the statute of
limitations, which otherwise would
have expired before October 16, 2007;
and (d) in which a Pre-Penalty Notice
was mailed, or a settlement tentatively

1Public Law 110-96, 121 Stat. 1011 (October 16,
2007) (amending 50 U.S.C. 1705).
250 U.S.C. 1701-06.

reached, prior to the September 8, 2008,
publication of the interim final rule.) In
all cases in which a Pre-Penalty Notice
has been issued prior to the publication
of this final rule, the case will continue
to be processed in accordance with the
enforcement guidelines pursuant to
which such Pre-Penalty Notice was
issued. The interim final rule also
solicited comments on the Guidelines
set forth therein.

OFAC hereby publishes an amended
version of the Enforcement Guidelines
as a final rule. These Enforcement
Guidelines are published as an
Appendix to the Reporting, Procedures
and Penalties Regulations, 31 CFR part
501. Except as noted above, the
Guidelines set forth herein are
applicable to all persons subject to any
of the sanctions programs administered
by OFAC. The Guidelines set forth in
this final rule are not applicable to
penalty or enforcement actions by other
agencies based on the same underlying
course of conduct, the disposition of
goods seized by Customs and Border
Protection, or the release of blocked
property by OFAC.

The Guidelines set forth in this final
rule are applicable to all enforcement
matters currently pending before OFAC
or that will come before OFAC in the
future, whether such matters fall under
IEEPA or any of the other statutes
pursuant to which OFAC is authorized
to enforce sanctions (including, but not
limited to, the Trading With the Enemy
Act), with the exception of those
categories of cases set forth in OFAC’s
November 27, 2007 Civil Penalties—
Interim Policy and OFAC’s October 28,
2008 Civil Penalties—Revised Interim
Policy. The Guidelines reflect the
factors that OFAC will consider in
determining the appropriate
enforcement response to an apparent
violation of an OFAC sanctions
program, and those factors are
consistent across programs. The civil
penalty provisions of the Guidelines
take into account the maximum
penalties available under the various
statutes pursuant to which OFAC is
authorized to enforce its sanctions
programs.

Summary of Comments

OFAC received eleven sets of
comments on the interim final rule,
from the following organizations: The
American Bar Association, the
Association of Corporate Credit Unions,
the American Insurance Association, the
British Bankers’ Association, the
Clearing House Association, the Credit
Union National Association, the
Industry Coalition on Technology
Transfer, the Institute of International
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57595

 

 

Bankers, the National Foreign Trade
Council, the Securities Industry and
Financial Markets Association, anda
joint submission from the American
Bankers Association and the Bankers
Association for Finance and Trade.?

Eight comments addressed the
definition of voluntary self-disclosure.
Although the final rule slightly amends
this definition, it does not do so in the
ways suggested by the comments. Six
comments questioned a perceived move
away from risk-based compliance, based
on OFAC’s withdrawal of the 2006
interim final rule setting forth Economic
Sanctions Enforcement Procedures for
Banking Institutions, and the risk
matrices that were issued as an annex to
that interim final rule. In response,
OFAC is reissuing a slightly edited and
consolidated risk matrix as an annex to
the Enforcement Guidelines and
clarifying that the adequacy of a Subject
Person’s risk-based compliance program
will be considered among the General
Factors considered by OFAC. Five
comments noted that OFAC should not
consider a Subject Person’s entering into
or refusing to enter into an agreement
tolling the statute of limitations in an
assessment of the Subject Person’s
cooperation with OFAC. In response,
OFAC is amending the Guidelines to
make clear that while entering into a
tolling agreement may be a basis for
mitigating the enforcement response or
lowering the penalty amount, a Subject
Person’s refusal to enter into such an
agreement will not be considered
against the Subject Person. Two
comments simply commended OFAC on
the Guidelines. Other comments
addressed other aspects of the
Guidelines.

Specific Responses to Comments

The comments received, OFAC’s
response to those comments, and
OFAC’s revisions to the Guidelines in
response to the comments are
summarized below.

1. Voluntary Self-disclosure

a. Third-Party Notifications. Many of
the comments that addressed the
definition of voluntary self-disclosure
expressed concern about the interim
final rule definition’s exclusion of
apparent violations where “‘a third party
is required to notify OFAC of the
apparent violation or a substantially
similar apparent violation because a
transaction was blocked or rejected by
that third party (regardless of whether or
when OFAC actually receives such

3 Several of the comments were received after the
November 7, 2008, deadline for submission of
comments. Those comments are nevertheless
addressed herein.

notice from the third party and
regardless of whether the Subject Person
was aware of the third party’s
disclosure).” The comments argued that
the definition should not exclude such
self-initiated notifications to OFAC, and
that OFAC should focus instead on the
good faith of the party making the
disclosure, regardless of whether
another party was obligated to report the
apparent violation. The comments
argued that broadening the definition of
voluntary self-disclosure will benefit
OFAC by encouraging such disclosures
and providing OFAC with additional
information regarding apparent
violations.

OFAC has considered these comments
but believes that the recommended
alternative approach would be difficult
to administer in a meaningful manner.
Accordingly, OFAC has determined to
maintain the exclusion for apparent
violations that a third party is required
to and does report to OFAC as a result
of the third party having blocked or
rejected a transaction in accordance
with OFAC’s regulations. The purpose
of mitigating the enforcement response
in voluntary self-disclosure cases is to
encourage the notification to OFAC of
apparent violations of which OFAC
would not otherwise have learned. In
those cases where a third party is
required to, and does, report an
apparent violation to OFAC, OFAC is
aware of the violation and there is no
need to provide incentives for such
notification. In addition, OFAC’s
administrative subpoena authority, 31
CFR 501.602, generally provides the
basis for OFAC to require the
production of whatever additional
information it may require to assess its
enforcement response to the apparent
violation. In those cases, therefore, there
is no need to further incentivize
disclosure to OFAC. Moreover, OFAC
believes that the “good faith” standard
suggested in the comments would be
administratively unworkable, as OFAC
would be unable to ascertain the good
or bad faith of Subject Persons making
disclosures of apparent violations. A
bright line rule generally defining a
voluntary self-disclosure based on
whether OFAC would otherwise have
learned of the apparent violation is
more readily administrable.

Consistent with the premise that in
those cases where OFAC would
otherwise not have learned of the
apparent violation a notification to
OFAC should be deemed a voluntary
self-disclosure, and in response to the
suggestion made in one comment,
OFAC is amending this aspect of the
definition of ‘‘voluntary self-disclosure’”’
by deleting the words “whether or”

from that part of the definition in the
interim final rule that provided that
notification to OFAC of an apparent
violation would not be considered a
voluntary self-disclosure “regardless of
whether or when OFAC actually
receives such notice from the third party
x * *”’ Thus, the final rule provides
that such notifications shall not be
considered voluntary self-disclosures
“regardless of when OF AC receives
such notice from the third party * * *.”
The change is intended to make clear
that in the event that a third party that
is required to report an apparent
violation to OFAC fails to do so, and the
Subject Person notifies OFAC of the
apparent violation in a manner
otherwise consistent with a voluntary
self-disclosure, the notification will be
considered a voluntary self-disclosure.
In those cases where the third party
does notify OFAC before a final
enforcement response to the apparent
violation, the Subject Person’s
notification will not be considered a
voluntary self-disclosure even if the
Subject Person’s notification precedes
the third party’s notification. This is
consistent with the notion that
voluntary self-disclosure does not apply
where OFAC would have learned of the
apparent violation in any event—in this
case, from the subsequent required
disclosure by the third party.
Interestingly, different industry
sectors all commented that this
provision of the definition would
unfairly target their industry. Thus, the
banking industry commented that
financial institutions are
disproportionately affected by this
exclusion, a trade group commented
that this exclusion ‘“‘define[s] the entire
import-export sector out of” the
definition, and the securities industry
commented that as a result of this
exclusion most filings by securities
firms would not be considered
voluntary self-disclosures. The fact that
these different industries believe that
the definition unfairly targets them
weakens the force of the argument as to
each. In any event, the argument does
not address the underlying basis for the
tule: The purpose of treating certain
notifications as voluntary self-
disclosures is to bring to OFAC’s
attention apparent violations of which it
otherwise would not have learned.
OFAC stresses that the final rule
provides (as did the interim final rule),
that “[iJn cases involving substantial
cooperation with OFAC but no
voluntary self-disclosure as defined
herein, including cases in which an
apparent violation is reported to OFAC
by a third party but the Subject Person
provides substantial additional
57596

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

information regarding the apparent
violation and/or other related violations,
the base penalty amount generally will
be reduced between 25 and 40 percent.”
In addition, a Subject Person’s
cooperation with OF AC—including
whether the Subject Person provided
OFAC with all relevant information
regarding an apparent violation
(whether or not voluntarily self-
disclosed}, and whether the Subject
Person researched and disclosed to
OFAC relevant information regarding
any other apparent violations caused by
the same course of conduct—is a
General Factor to be considered in
assessing OFAC’s enforcement response
to the apparent violation. These
provisions are intended to reward
voluntary disclosures of all relevant
information and address the concerns
raised by the comments. The provisions
make clear that a Subject Person’s
cooperation with OFAC can have a
substantial impact on the nature of
OFAC’s enforcement response to an
apparent violation, even in cases that do
not meet the definition of “voluntary
self-disclosure” set forth in the final
rule.

Several comments noted that failure
to treat self-initiated notifications to
OFAC in the circumstances discussed
above as voluntary self-disclosures
causes unwarranted reputational harm
to the institutions involved. OFAC does
not believe that this concern provides a
sufficient basis to alter the definition of
voluntary self-disclosure discussed
above. In response to this comment,
OFAC has amended the final rule to
expressly provide that, where
appropriate, substantial cooperation by
a Subject Person in OFAC’s
investigation will be publicly noted.

b. Material Completeness. Several
comments also suggested that the
definition’s exclusion of disclosures that
are materially incomplete is unfair
because a party may not have had time
to complete its investigation or access
supplementary material before OFAC
learns of an apparent violation from
another source. The definition of
voluntary self-disclosure set forth in the
interim final rule, and retained in this
final rule, excludes only those
notifications where ‘‘the disclosure
(when considered along with
supplemental information provided by
the Subject Person) is materially
incomplete” (emphasis added).
Similarly, the definition provides that
“liln addition to notification, a
voluntary self-disclosure must include,
or be followed within a reasonable
period of time by, a report of sufficient
detail to afford a complete
understanding of an apparent violation’s

circumstances, and should also be
followed by responsiveness to any
follow-up inquiries by OFAC.”
(emphasis added). The definition thus
expressly contemplates that a Subject
Person may notify OFAC of an apparent
violation before it has completed its
investigation or accessed all of the
supplementary material necessary for a
complete disclosure. So long as that
information is provided to OFAC within
a reasonable period of time after the
initial notification of the apparent
violation, and assuming the other
aspects of the definition are met, the
disclosure would still constitute a
voluntary self-disclosure. OFAC
therefore concludes that this aspect of
the definition already accommodates
these comments and does not need to be
changed.

c. Good Faith. OFAC likewise has
considered and rejected the suggestion
that the definition of voluntary self-
disclosure not exclude disclosures that
include false or misleading information
or that are made without management
authorization, when the disclosure is
made in good faith. As noted above, the
good faith standard is not readily
administrable. OFAC believes that
disclosures that contain false or
misleading information should not
receive the substantial benefit accorded
to voluntary self-disclosures. In such
cases, OFAC will consider the totality of
the circumstances in determining
whether the false or misleading
information warrants negation of a
finding of voluntary self-disclosure.
When the Subject Person is an entity,
disclosures made without the
authorization of the entity’s senior
management do not reflect disclosure by
the entity but rather by a third party. A
finding of voluntary self-disclosure by
the Subject Person is not warranted in
whistleblower cases. Nor does OFAC
believe that a whistleblower should be
required to first notify the entity’s senior
management, as one comment
suggested.

d. Regulatory Suggestion. One
comment suggested that OFAC delete
the word “suggestion” from that part of
the definition of voluntary self-
disclosure that excludes a disclosure
that “‘is not self-initiated (including
when the disclosure results from a
suggestion or order of a federal or state
agency or official), on the ground that
the term “‘suggestion” produces a
subjective standard. While OFAC
recognizes the concern expressed in the
comment, in many instances federal or
state regulators do not formally order
institutions to report an apparent
violation to OFAC. The use of the
phrase “suggestion” in this context is

intended to capture those instances in
which a Subject Person’s regulator, or
another government agency or official,
directs, instructs, tells, or otherwise
suggests to the Subject Person that it
notify OFAC of the apparent violation.
In such cases, the notification to OFAC
by the Subject Person is not properly
considered self-initiated and OFAC
likely would have learned of the
apparent violation from the other
government agency or official in the
event that the Subject Person did not
itself notify OFAC.

e. Timing of Notification. OFAC has
also considered the comment that
offered an alternative definition of
voluntary self-disclosure that would
have treated as a voluntary self-
disclosure any notification to OFAC of
an apparent violation prior to the time
that OFAC issued a Pre-Penalty Notice,
and suggested other changes to the
definition. OFAC does not believe that
the suggested changes are warranted. A
Pre-Penalty Notice is typically issued
once OFAC has completed an
investigation into an apparent violation,
and such investigation often involves
the issuance of administrative
subpoenas to the Subject Person.
Affording voluntary self-disclosure
credit to disclosures made after the
issuance of such a subpoena would
reward Subject Persons who did not
disclose the apparent violation to OFAC
until after OFAC had learned of it from
other sources, and it would not accord
with the purpose of mitigating the
enforcement response in voluntary self-
disclosure cases, which is to encourage
the notification to OFAC of apparent
violations of which OFAC would not
otherwise have learned.

f. Suspicious Activity Report Filing.
One comment asked that OFAC clarify
that the filing of a Suspicious Activity
Report (SAR) by a Subject Person
pursuant to the Bank Secrecy Act has no
impact on whether a subsequent
notification to OFAC of an apparent
violation, presumably based on the
same transaction that is the subject of
the SAR, constitutes a voluntary self-
disclosure. The filing of a SAR does not
itself preclude a determination of
voluntary self-disclosure for a
subsequent self-disclosure to OFAC of
the same transaction, except to the
extent that OFAC has learned of the
apparent violation prior to the filing of
the self-disclosure.

g. What to Report. One comment
requested clarification regarding the
circumstances in which the mere
possibility that a violation exists should
cause an institution to make a voluntary
self-disclosure. The comment noted that
the alleged uncertainty surrounding this
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57597

 

 

issue creates a strong incentive for an
institution to err on the side of reporting
transactions that likely do not constitute
a violation. OFAC does not believe that
additional guidance is necessary or
warranted. The Guidelines define an
“apparent violation” as an actual or
possible violation of U.S. economic
sanctions laws, and they define a
voluntary self-disclosure as a self-
initiated notification to OFAC of an
apparent violation (subject to the other
provisions of the definition). The
Subject Person determines whether to
report an apparent violation to OFAC.
Such a notification to OFAC need not
constitute an admission that the
conduct at issue actually constitutes a
violation in order to be considered a
voluntary self-disclosure. To the extent
that the Guidelines as written provide
an incentive for ‘‘over-reporting’’ to
OFAC of possible violations, OFAC does
not view that as a problem that needs to
be addressed. To the contrary, OFAC
would prefer that Subject Persons report
a transaction or conduct that is
ultimately determined to not be a
violation, rather than that they elect not
to report conduct that does constitute a
violation.

h. Other OFAC Modifications. Finally,
OFAC has made two additional changes
to the definition of voluntary self-
disclosure. The first change is to make
clear that a self-initiated notification to
OFAC that is made at the same time as
another government agency learns of the
apparent violation (through the Subject
Person’s disclosure to that other agency
or otherwise) does qualify as a voluntary
self-disclosure if the other aspects of the
definition are met. This change is
intended to cover voluntary self-
disclosures made simultaneously to
OFAC and another government agency.
OFAC has thus substituted the phrase
“prior to or at the same time” for the
phrase ‘‘prior to” in the operative
sentence of the definition, which now
reads:

“Voluntary self-disclosure means self-
initiated notification to OFAC of an apparent
violation by a Subject Person that has
committed, or otherwise participated in, an
apparent violation of a statute, Executive
order, or regulation administered or enforced
by OFAC, prior to or at the same time that
OFAC, or any other federal, state, or local
government agency or official, discovers the
apparent violation or another substantially
similar apparent violation.”

OFAC has also added the following
sentence to the definition of voluntary
self-disclosure:

“Notification of an apparent violation to
another government agency (but not to

OFAC) by a Subject Person, which is
considered a voluntary self-disclosure by that

agency, may be considered a voluntary self-
disclosure by OFAC, based on a case-by-case
assessment of the facts and circumstances.”

This is intended to clarify that OFAC
may treat a voluntary self-disclosure to
another government agency as a
voluntary self-disclosure to OFAC when
the circumstances so warrant.

2. Risk-Based Compliance

Six comments questioned whether
OFAC intended to move away from the
tisk-based compliance approach
reflected in the 2006 Economic
Sanctions Enforcement Procedures for
Banking Institutions, which, along with
their appended risk matrices, were
withdrawn by the interim final rule. In
no way has OFAC moved away from
considering an institution’s risk-based
compliance program in assessing the
appropriate enforcement response to an
apparent violation. The final rule
clarifies this by making explicit
reference to risk-based compliance in its
discussion of General Factor E, which
focuses on a Subject Person’s
compliance program, and by re-
promulgating with minor edits and in
consolidated form, as an annex to the
final rule, the risk matrices that had
originally been promulgated as an annex
to the 2006 Enforcement Procedures. By
these changes, OFAC intends to reflect
that it will continue to apply the same
tisk-based principles it has been
applying in assessing the overall
adequacy of a Subject Person’s
compliance program.

Two comments argued that in the case
of banks, OFAC’s focus should be more
narrowly focused on the bank’s fault or
the nature of its compliance program.
OFAC has considered these comments,
but believes that all of the General
Factors are as applicable to banks as
they are to other Subject Persons. Those
Factors account for both fault and the
nature and existence of a compliance
program, but they also account for other
criteria that are relevant to a
determination of an appropriate
enforcement response to an apparent
violation. For example, the degree of
harm caused by an apparent violation is
as relevant and important a factor to
consider in cases involving banks as it
is in other cases. OFAC thus disagrees
with the comment that asserted that less
weight should be afforded to the harm
to sanctions programs objectives and a
greater emphasis placed on risk-based
compliance. The harm to sanctions
program objectives is as valid and
relevant a consideration as an
institution’s risk-based compliance
program, and the Final Guidelines
appropriately account for consideration
of both factors.

One comment expressed concern
about the absence of a process to
periodically evaluate an institution’s
violations in the context of its overall
OFAC compliance program and OFAC
compliance record. The Guidelines,
however, expressly provide for
consideration of both an institution’s
OFAC compliance program and its
overall compliance record over time in
a number of places. For example, the
Guidelines provide for consideration of
a Subject Person’s compliance program
in General Factor E, which, as noted
above, has been clarified to make
explicit reference to risk-based
compliance. The Guidelines also
provide that in considering the
individual characteristics of a Subject
Person (General Factor D), OFAC will
consider “‘[t]he total volume of
transactions undertaken by the Subject
Person on an annual basis, with
attention given to the apparent
violations as compared with the total
volume.” This provision of the
Guidelines is intended to allow for the
consideration of any apparent violation
in the context of a Subject Person’s
overall compliance record.

Another comment addressing risk-
based compliance asserted that the
Guidelines reflect ““OFAC’s stated
intention to apply penalties on every
erroneous transaction.” The Guidelines
do not so state; to the contrary, they
expressly note that “OFAC will give
careful consideration to the
appropriateness of issuing a cautionary
letter or Finding of Violation in lieu of
the imposition of a civil monetary
penalty.” Another comment suggested
that OFAC should state that it will not
assess penalties based on minor or
isolated compliance deficiencies. OFAC
believes that the process set forth in the
Guidelines for determining its
enforcement response to an apparent
violation is appropriate and that it
would not be appropriate to make
broader, categorical statements of its
enforcement policy based on the minor
or isolated nature of an apparent
violation. The General Factors already
account for the consideration of the
minor or isolated nature of an apparent
violation in determining whether a civil
monetary penalty is warranted.

3. Cooperation and Tolling Agreements

Five comments argued that OFAC
should not consider whether a Subject
Person agreed to waive the statute of
limitations or enter into a tolling
agreement in assessing the Subject
Person’s cooperation with OFAC. The
comments argued that it was unfair and
contrary to public policy to consider
this as a factor. One comment suggested
57598

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

that the provision should either be
dropped or its consideration limited to
cases where late discovery by or
notification to OFAC threatens
resolution within the five year statute of
limitations period and that tolling
agreements should be limited to
extending the period for no more than
five years from discovery of the
apparent violation by OFAC.

OFAC has carefully considered these
comments. The interim final rule
addressed both waivers of the statute of
limitations and tolling agreements. It is
not OFAC’s general practice to seek
outright waivers of the statute of
limitations, and the final rule eliminates
any reference to statute of limitations
waivers.

OFAC agrees that a Subject Person’s
refusal to enter into a tolling agreement
should not be considered an aggravating
factor in assessing a Subject Person’s
cooperation or otherwise. At the same
time, a tolling agreement can be of
significant value to OFAC, especially in
cases where OFAC does not learn of an
apparent violation at or near the time it
occurs, in particularly complex cases, or
in cases in which a Subject Person has
requested and received additional time
to respond to a request for information
from OFAC. Accordingly, OFAC
believes it appropriate to consider a
Subject Person’s entering into a tolling
agreement in a positive light and as a
basis for mitigating the enforcement
response or lowering the penalty
amount. The final rule thus clarifies that
while a Subject Person’s willingness to
enter into a tolling agreement may be
considered a mitigating factor, a Subject
Person’s unwillingness to enter into
such an agreement will not be
considered against the Subject Person.

4. Penalty Calculation

Two comments addressed the
calculation of the base penalty amount
under the Guidelines.

a. Disparity in Base Penalty Amounts.
One comment suggested that the
applicable schedule amounts, which are
applicable to cases involving non-
egregious apparent violations that are
not voluntarily self-disclosed to OFAC,
be changed to lessen the disparity in the
base penalty amount between such
cases and non-egregious cases that are
voluntarily self-disclosed.4 OFAC has
considered this suggestion but believes
that the applicable schedule amounts,
which provide for a gradated series of
penalties based on the underlying

4The base penalty amount for a non-egregious
case involving a voluntary self-disclosure equals
one-half of the transaction value, capped at
$125,000 for an apparent violation of IEEPA and
$32,500 for an apparent violation of TWEA.

transaction value, reflect an appropriate
starting point for the penalty calculation
in non-egregious cases not involving a
voluntary self-disclosure. As currently
structured, the base penalty calculation
ensures that the base penalty for a
voluntarily self-disclosed case will
always be one-half or less than one-half
of the base penalty for a similar case
that is not voluntarily self-disclosed.
This is intended to serve as an
additional incentive for voluntary self-
disclosure.

b. Other Penalty Issues. A second
comment made a number of suggestions
regarding the penalty calculation. OFAC
has considered each of these
suggestions, which are discussed below.

i. Egregious Cases. First, this
comment suggested that OFAC reduce
the base penalty amount for egregious
cases by 50 percent and clarify the
extent to which that amount may be
increased by aggravating factors.
Reducing the base penalty amount for
egregious cases would not adequately
reflect the seriousness with which
OFAC views such cases. As set forth in
the preamble to the interim final rule,
OFAC anticipates that the majority of
enforcement cases will fall in the non-
egregious category.

ii. Specified Reduction for
Remediation. Second, this comment
suggested that OFAC provide for
remedial measures as a mitigating factor
and state the extent to which such
actions generally will reduce the base
penalty amount (e.g., 10-25%). The
Guidelines expressly recognize a
Subject Person’s remedial response as
one of the General Factors OFAC will
consider in determining its enforcement
response to an apparent violation.
OFAC does not believe it appropriate to
identify a specific range of mitigation
for remedial measures, which can vary
widely in their nature and scope. The
Guidelines envision a holistic
examination of the facts and
circumstances surrounding an apparent
violation in determining a proposed
penalty amount. With the exception of
first offenses and substantial
cooperation, OFAC does not believe it
appropriate to provide a specified
mitigation percentage for the existence
of potentially mitigating factors.

ill. Specified Reduction for
Cooperation. Third, the comment
suggested that OFAC specify that
substantial cooperation in voluntary
self-disclosure cases would reduce the
base penalty amount by 25% to 40% (as
would occur in cases that do not involve
a voluntary self-disclosure). This
suggestion appears to misapprehend the
purpose of the provision of the
Guidelines that provides for such a

reduction in non-voluntarily self-
disclosed cases. The reduction in the
base penalty amount for cases involving
substantial cooperation but no voluntary
self-disclosure is intended to
approximate the significant mitigation
provided for voluntary self-disclosure
cases in the base penalty amount itself.
This reduction is intended to afford
parties whose conduct was reported to
OFAC by others (for example, through a
blocking or reject report) the
opportunity to obtain, by providing
substantial cooperation, much (but not
all) of the benefit they would have
obtained had they voluntarily self-
disclosed the apparent violation.
Subject Persons who have voluntarily
self-disclosed their apparent violations
to OFAC are already benefiting from a
significantly reduced base penalty
amount. Moreover, a voluntary self-
disclosure must include, or be followed
within a reasonable period of time by,

a report of sufficient detail to afford a
complete understanding of an apparent
violation’s circumstances, and should
also be followed by responsiveness to
any follow-up inquiries by OFAC.
OFAC recognizes that in some instances
an additional reduction in the base
penalty amount based on substantial
cooperation may be warranted in cases
involving voluntary self-disclosure, but
that additional reduction may be less
than 25 to 40 percent.

iv. Specified Additional Adjustments.
Fourth, the comment suggested that
OFAC specify that further adjustments
to the base penalty amount may be
made depending on the relevance of the
other General Factors, including in
particular the existence and nature ofa
compliance program and permissibility
of the conduct under applicable foreign
law. The Guidelines already expressly
provide that the base penalty amount
may be adjusted to reflect applicable
General Factors, including the existence
and nature of a compliance program.
The suggestion that the penalty be
adjusted in light of the permissibility of
the conduct under applicable foreign
law is addressed below under the
heading “Compliance With Foreign
Law.”

v. Emphasize Number vs. Value of
Transactions. Fifth, the comment
suggested that OFAC clarify that when
considering ‘‘apparent violations as
compared with the total volume” of
transactions undertaken by a Subject
Person, the focus will be on the number
rather than the value of transactions.
OFAC does not believe that such a
clarification is warranted. While in
many cases the overall number of
transactions, as compared to the number
of apparent violations, will be the
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57599

 

 

appropriate measure of a Subject
Person’s overall compliance program,
there may be cases where the relative
value of the transactions is the more
appropriate metric. OFAC will address
this issue on a case-by-case basis, as
appropriate.

vi. First Violations. Finally, the
comment suggested that OFAC clarify
that, for purposes of the reduction of the
penalty amount by up to 25% for cases
involving a Subject Person’s first
violation, OFAC will consider the entire
set of “substantially similar violations”
at issue in a case as a single ‘first
violation,” and thus provide the penalty
reduction for all transactions at issue,
and not just for the first of the
substantially similar violations. OFAC
intends that in enforcement cases
addressing a set of “substantially similar
violations,” the penalty reduction for a
Subject Person’s first violation will
generally apply to the entire set of
“substantially similar violations” and
not solely to the first of those violations.
OFAC has added the following sentence
to the final rule to clarify this: “A group
of substantially similar apparent
violations addressed in a single Pre-
Penalty Notice shall be considered as a
single violation for purposes of this
subsection.” In addition, OFAC has
clarified that an apparent violation
generally will be considered a “first
violation” if the Subject Person has not
received a penalty notice or Finding of
Violation from OFAC in the five years
preceding the date of the transaction
giving rise to the apparent violation, and
that in those cases where a prior penalty
notice or Finding of Violation within
the preceding five years involved
conduct of a substantially different
nature from the apparent violation at
issue, OFAC may still consider the
apparent violation at issue a “first
violation.”

5. General Factors

A number of comments either
identified additional proposed General
Factors that OFAC should consider or
suggested the deletion of General
Factors as inappropriate for OFAC’s
consideration.

a. Compliance With Foreign Law. Two
comments suggested that, in cases
concerning conduct occurring outside
the United States, OFAC should
consider whether the conduct in
question is permissible under the
applicable law of another jurisdiction.
OFAC does not agree that the
permissibility of conduct under the
applicable laws of another jurisdiction
should be a factor in assessing an
apparent violation of U.S. laws. In cases
where the applicable laws of another

jurisdiction require conduct prohibited
by OFAC sanctions (or vice versa),
OFAC will consider the conflict under
General Factor K, which provides for
the consideration of relevant factors on
a case-by-case basis. OFAC notes that
Subject Persons can seek a license from
OFAC to engage in otherwise prohibited
transactions and that the absence of
such a license request will be
considered in assessing an apparent
violation where conflict of laws is raised
by the Subject Person.

b. Reliance on Advice from OFAC.
Three comments suggested that OFAC
should explicitly state that good faith
reliance on advice from the OFAC
hotline (two comments) or on a
reasoned analysis of OFAC regulations
with the assistance of private counsel
(one comment) should be considered in
assessing an appropriate enforcement
response. Subject Persons are
encouraged to seek written guidance
from OFAC on complex matters for the
sake of clarity. Good faith reliance on
substantiated advice received from the
OFAC hotline or from counsel is
subsumed within OFAC’s consideration
of whether a Subject Person willfully or
recklessly violated the law.

c. Relevance of Future Compliance/
Deterrence. One comment suggested
that OFAC should eliminate General
Factor J, which focuses on the impact
that administrative action may have on
promoting future compliance with U.S.
economic sanctions by the Subject
Person and similar Subject Persons,
arguing that OF AC’s enforcement
response should focus solely on the
Subject Person’s culpability. OFAC
rejects this argument, as the purpose of
enforcement action includes raising
awareness, increasing compliance, and
deterring future violations, and not
merely punishment of prior conduct.

d. Reason to Know. One comment
suggested that OFAC should eliminate
the “reason to know’”’ provision of
General Factor B, which focuses on the
Subject Person’s awareness of the
conduct giving rise to the apparent
violation. OFAC rejects this suggestion
as it would invite Subject Persons to act
with willful blindness. OFAC believes
the “reason to know’”’ formulation is
consistent with general legal principles
and appropriate for consideration.

e. Responsibility for Employees. One
comment suggested that OFAC should
make clear that actions of ‘‘rogue
employees,” including supervisors or
managers, will not be attributed to
organizations so long as a reasonable
compliance program was in place.
OFAC rejects this suggestion. The
actions of employees may be properly
attributable to their organizations,

depending on the facts and
circumstances of the particular case.
Among the factors OFAC will consider
in determining whether such actions are
attributable to an organization are the
position of the employee in question,
the nature of the conduct (including
how long it lasted), who else was or
should have been aware of the conduct,
and the existence and nature of a
compliance program intended to
identify and stop such conduct.

f. Sanctions History. One comment
suggested that cautionary letters,
warning letters, and evaluative letters
should not be considered when
assessing a Subject Person’s sanctions
violations history. OFAC believes that
such prior letters are appropriate to
consider in determining an appropriate
enforcement response. In addition, such
letters evidence the Subject Person’s
awareness of OFAC sanctions generally.
OFAC has amended the final rule to
refer to “‘sanctions history” instead of
“sanctions violations history” to make
clear that consideration is not limited to
prior formal determinations of sanctions
violations.

OFAC has also amended the final rule
to note that, as a general matter,
consideration of a Subject Person’s
sanctions history will be limited to the
five years preceding the transaction
giving rise to the apparent violation. As
explained above, a five-year limitation
has also been incorporated into the
provision providing that in cases
involving a Subject Person’s first
violation, the base penalty amount
generally will be reduced up to 25
percent, so that “‘first violation” is
understood as the first violation in the
five years preceding the transaction
giving rise to the apparent violation. In
certain cases, however, such as those
involving enforcement responses to
substantially similar apparent
violations, it may be appropriate to
consider sanctions history outside the
five-year period.

g. Transition Period for Foreign
Acquisitions. One comment suggested
that the Guidelines should provide a
transition period for cases in which a
Subject Person acquires an entity
outside the United States not previously
subject to OFAC requirements. OFAC
does not believe that such a provision
is warranted. U.S. persons acquiring
entities outside the United States should
consider OFAC compliance as part of
their due diligence review of the
acquisition.

6. Provision of Information to OFAC

Four comments focused on possible
impediments to fully complying with an
OFAC request for information. Three of
57600

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

these comments raised concerns about
foreign laws that may prohibit the
provision of requested information to
OFAC. OFAC does not believe that these
comments warrant a change to the text
of the interim final rule. As discussed
above with respect to conflict-of-laws
situations, OFAC will give due
consideration to applicable restrictions
of foreign law regarding the provision of
information to OFAC on a case-by-case
basis. OFAC expects that Subject
Persons will provide to OFAC a detailed
explanation of any allegedly applicable
foreign law and the steps undertaken by
the Subject Person to avail themselves
of all legal means to provide the
requested information.

One comment raised concerns about
information protected by the attorney-
client privilege or the attorney work
product doctrine. OFAC generally does
not expect Subject Persons to provide
privileged or protected information in
response to a request for information or
otherwise. OFAC does, however, expect
Subject Persons who withhold
responsive information on the grounds
of the attorney-client or other privilege
or the work product doctrine to properly
invoke such privilege or protection and
to identify such withheld information
on a privilege log, in accordance with
any instructions accompanying requests
for information and ordinary legal
practice. OFAC has clarified the
provision of the Guidelines providing
for penalties for failure to respond to a
request for information by eliminating
the reference to ‘failure to furnish the
requested information” and instead
referring to a “failure to comply” with
a request for information. The revised
language is intended to make clear that
OFAC will not seek penalties in those
cases where responsive information is
withheld on the basis of an apparently
applicable and properly invoked
privilege.

7. Penalty/Finding of Violation Process

Several comments made suggestions
regarding OFAC’s penalty process. One
comment suggested that OFAC should
offer Subject Persons a meeting before
issuing a Pre-Penalty Notice, and
another comment suggested that OFAC
provide a process by which to appeal a
final enforcement decision. OFAC does
not believe that the adoption of either
suggestion is warranted. In most cases,
OFAC will have communicated with the
Subject Person (by means of issuing a
request for information or receiving a
disclosure) prior to issuance of the Pre-
Penalty Notice. Moreover, the Pre-
Penalty Notice does not constitute final
agency action and specifically affords a
Subject Person the opportunity to

respond to the allegations and proposed
penalty set forth therein with additional
information or argument.

OFAC also does not believe that an
administrative appeal process is
warranted. In cases involving civil
monetary penalties, the Pre-Penalty
Process just described affords a Subject
Person sufficient opportunity to present
its case to OFAC before a Penalty Notice
is issued. In cases involving a Finding
of Violation, the Guidelines provide that
a Finding of Violation will afford the
Subject Person an opportunity to
respond to OFAC’s determination that a
violation has occurred before the
finding is made final. No other actions
by OFAC constitute formal
determinations of violation, and no
administrative appeal process is
therefore necessary in such cases.5

8. Other Comments

One comment suggested that OFAC
should be sensitive to the views of non-
U.S. regulators. The Guidelines explain
that OFAC may seek information from a
regulated institution’s foreign regulator,
and may take into account the views of
a foreign regulator with respect to a
Subject Person’s compliance program
where relevant. Nor do the Guidelines
preclude other consideration of foreign
regulators’ views. Accordingly, OFAC
believes that no additional changes are
necessary in this regard.

One comment suggested that the
definition of “transaction value” needs
clarification because it does not allocate
responsibility in multiparty
transactions, and this comment
suggested certain edits to the definition
with the goal of clarifying that
transaction value will be determined
based on a Subject Person’s role in the
transaction. OFAC has considered this
comment but determined that no change
is needed to the definition of transaction
value. The current definition provides
sufficient flexibility to allow for the
determination of an appropriate
transaction value in a wide variety of
circumstances, including multiparty
transactions where the differing roles of
the parties may result in differing
transaction values.

One comment suggested that there
should be two sets of guidelines, one for
financial institutions and one for
entities focused on trade in goods,
arguing that these types of entities
maintain different business models.
OFAC considered such an approach

5 The Trading With the Enemy Act and its
implementing regulations, 31 CFR part 501, subpart
D, provide for Administrative Law Judge hearings
on penalty determinations. Nothing in the
Guidelines affects the applicability of those
provisions.

when developing the Guidelines, but
determined that a single set of
Guidelines, providing general factors
and sufficient flexibility, was a better
approach. The Guidelines as crafted do
not dictate a particular outcome in any
particular case, but rather are intended
to identify those factors most relevant to
OFAC’s enforcement decision and to
guide the agency’s exercise of its
discretion. Because the General Factors
are equally applicable to all sectors, and
because the Guidelines provide
sufficient flexibility to allow for the
consideration of the factors most
relevant to a particular Subject Person,
OFAC does not believe that
particularized sets of Guidelines for
particular business models are
warranted or necessary.

OFAC Edits

In addition to the changes made in
response to public comments and the
additional changes to the definition of
voluntary self-disclosure described
above, OFAC has made several other
changes to the Guidelines. First, OFAC
has clarified the base penalty amounts
for transactions subject to the Trading
With the Enemy Act (TWEA), which
presently has a $65,000 statutory
maximum penalty. In non-egregious
cases involving apparent violations of
TWEA, where the apparent violation is
disclosed through a voluntary self-
disclosure by the Subject Person (i.e.,
Box “1” on the penalty matrix), the base
amount of the proposed civil penalty
shall be capped at a maximum of
$32,500 per violation. This correction is
necessary to ensure that in such cases
the base amount of the proposed civil
penalty is no more than one-half the
base penalty amount for a similar
transaction that is not voluntarily self-
disclosed.

OFAC is also clarifying that for non-
egregious transactions under TWEA that
are not voluntarily self-disclosed, the
base amount of the civil penalty shall be
capped at $65,000. The Guidelines
already provide for this by capping base
penalty amounts at the applicable
statutory maximum; this change is
intended simply to clarify this point.
Similarly, OFAC is clarifying that, in
egregious cases, the base penalty
calculation will be based on the
“applicable” statutory maximum, in an
effort to signal that the base penalty in
such cases will differ for transactions
under IEEPA (where the statutory
maximum equals the greater of $250,000
or an amount that is twice the value of
the transaction), TWEA (where the
statutory maximum equals $65,000), or
other applicable statutes.
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57601

 

 

OFAC has also amended the
Guidelines to provide for a penalty of
up to $50,000 for a failure to maintain
records in conformance with the
requirements of OFAC regulations. This
change is intended to ensure that
penalties for a failure to maintain
records are commensurate with
penalties for a failure to comply with a
requirement to furnish information.

The Guidelines are also amended to
make clear that for apparent violations
identified in the Cuba Penalty Schedule,
68 FR 4422, 4429 (Jan. 29, 2003), for
which a civil monetary penalty has been
deemed appropriate, the base penalty
amount shall equal the amount set forth
in the Schedule for such a violation,
except that the base penalty amount
shall be reduced by 50% in cases of
voluntary self-disclosure. This is
intended to clarify the interplay
between the penalty amounts set forth
in the Cuba Penalty Schedule and the
base penalty calculation process set
forth in the Guidelines.

OFAC has eliminated the reference to
the Cuba Travel Service Provider
Circular in Part IV of the Guidelines, as
that Circular has been amended to
include a reference to the Guidelines,
which now govern apparent violations
by licensed Travel Service Providers.

OFAC has also changed references to
“conduct, activity, or transaction” to
“conduct” throughout the Guidelines.
This change is not intended to have
substantive effect, but rather to provide
greater consistency in terminology
within the Guidelines. OFAC
understands the term ‘‘conduct” to
encompass “activities” and
“transactions,” and notes the definition
of an ‘‘apparent violation” is based on
the term “‘conduct.”

Finally, in General Factor H,
concerning the timing of the apparent
violation in relation to the imposition of
sanctions, OFAC has changed the word
“soon” to “immediately” so that the
relevant provision reads: ‘‘the timing of
the apparent violation in relation to the
adoption of the applicable prohibitions,
particularly if the apparent violation
took place immediately after relevant
changes to the sanctions program
regulations or the addition of a new
name to OFAC’s List of Specially
Designated Nationals and Blocked
Persons (SDN List).” This change is
intended to more accurately reflect the
purpose of General Factor H and to
convey that mitigation as a result of
changes to sanctions program
regulations or additions to the SDN List
is unlikely to be applicable other than
in the time period immediately
following such changes or additions.

List of Subjects in 31 CFR Part 501

Administrative practice and
procedure, Banks, Banking, Insurance,
Money service business, Penalties,
Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements, Securities.

m For the reasons set forth in the
preamble, 31 CFR part 501 is amended
as follows:

PART 501—REPORTING,
PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES
REGULATIONS

m 1. The authority citation for part 501
continues to read as follows:

Authority: 8 U.S.C. 1189; 18 U.S.C. 2332d,
2339B; 19 U.S.C. 3901-3913; 21 U.S.C. 1901-
1908; 22 U.S.C. 287c; 22 U.S.C. 2370(a),
6009, 6032, 7205; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 31
U.S.C. 321(b); 50 U.S.C. 1701-1706; 50 U.S.C.
App. 1-44.

m 2. Part 501 is amended by revising
Appendix A to Part 501 to read as
follows:

Appendix A to Part 501—Economic
Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines.

Note: This appendix provides a general
framework for the enforcement of all
economic sanctions programs administered
by the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC).

I. Definitions

A. Apparent violation means conduct that
constitutes an actual or possible violation of
U.S. economic sanctions laws, including the
International Emergency Economic Powers
Act (IEEPA), the Trading With the Enemy Act
(TWEA), the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin
Designation Act, and other statutes
administered or enforced by OFAC, as well
as Executive orders, regulations, orders,
directives, or licenses issued pursuant
thereto.

B. Applicable schedule amount means:

1. $1,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at less than $1,000;

2. $10,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $1,000 or more but less than
$10,000;

3. $25,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $10,000 or more but less than
$25,000;

4. $50,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $25,000 or more but less than
$50,000;

5. $100,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $50,000 or more but less than
$100,000;

6. $170,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $100,000 or more but less than
$170,000;

7. $250,000 with respect to a transaction
valued at $170,000 or more, except that
where the applicable schedule amount as
defined above exceeds the statutory
maximum civil penalty amount applicable to
an apparent violation, the applicable
schedule amount shall equal such applicable
statutory maximum civil penalty amount.

C. OFAC means the Department of the
Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control.

D. Penalty is the final civil penalty amount
imposed in a Penalty Notice.

E. Proposed penalty is the civil penalty
amount set forth in a Pre-Penalty Notice.

F. Regulator means any Federal, State,
local or foreign official or agency that has
authority to license or examine an entity for
compliance with federal, state, or foreign
law.

G. Subject Person means an individual or
entity subject to any of the sanctions
programs administered or enforced by OFAC.

H. Transaction value means the dollar
value of a subject transaction. In export and
import cases, the transaction value generally
will be the domestic value in the United
States of the goods, technology, or services
sought to be exported from or imported into
the United States, as demonstrated by
commercial invoices, bills of lading, signed
Customs declarations, or similar documents.
In cases involving seizures by U.S. Customs
and Border Protection (CBP), the transaction
value generally will be the domestic value as
determined by CBP. If the apparent violation
at issue is a prohibited dealing in blocked
property by a Subject Person, the transaction
value generally will be the dollar value of the
underlying transaction involved, such as the
value of the property dealt in or the amount
of the funds transfer that a financial
institution failed to block or reject. Where the
transaction value is not otherwise
ascertainable, OFAC may consider the market
value of the goods or services that were the
subject of the transaction, the economic
benefit conferred on the sanctioned party,
and/or the economic benefit derived by the
Subject Person from the transaction, in
determining transaction value. For purposes
of these Guidelines, ‘‘transaction value” will
not necessarily have the same meaning, nor
be applied in the same manner, as that term
is used for import valuation purposes at 19
CFR 152.103.

I. Voluntary self-disclosure means self-
initiated notification to OFAC of an apparent
violation by a Subject Person that has
committed, or otherwise participated in, an
apparent violation of a statute, Executive
order, or regulation administered or enforced
by OFAC, prior to or at the same time that
OFAC, or any other federal, state, or local
government agency or official, discovers the
apparent violation or another substantially
similar apparent violation. For these
purposes, “substantially similar apparent
violation” means an apparent violation that
is part of a series of similar apparent
violations or is related to the same pattern or
practice of conduct. Notification of an
apparent violation to another government
agency (but not to OFAC) by a Subject
Person, which is considered a voluntary self-
disclosure by that agency, may be considered
a voluntary self-disclosure by OFAC, based
on a case-by-case assessment. Notification to
OFAC of an apparent violation is not a
voluntary self-disclosure if: a third party is
required to and does notify OFAC of the
apparent violation or a substantially similar
apparent violation because a transaction was
blocked or rejected by that third party
(regardless of when OFAC receives such
57602

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

notice from the third party and regardless of
whether the Subject Person was aware of the
third party’s disclosure); the disclosure
includes false or misleading information; the
disclosure (when considered along with
supplemental information provided by the
Subject Person) is materially incomplete; the
disclosure is not self-initiated (including
when the disclosure results from a suggestion
or order of a federal or state agency or
official); or, when the Subject Person is an
entity, the disclosure is made by an
individual in a Subject Person entity without
the authorization of the entity’s senior
management. Responding to an
administrative subpoena or other inquiry
from, or filing a license application with,
OFAC is not a voluntary self-disclosure. In
addition to notification, a voluntary self-
disclosure must include, or be followed
within a reasonable period of time by, a
report of sufficient detail to afford a complete
understanding of an apparent violation’s
circumstances, and should also be followed
by responsiveness to any follow-up inquiries
by OFAC. (As discussed further below, a
Subject Person’s level of cooperation with
OFAC is an important factor in determining
the appropriate enforcement response to an
apparent violation even in the absence of a
voluntary self-disclosure as defined herein;
disclosure by a Subject Person generally will
result in mitigation insofar as it represents
cooperation with OFAC’s investigation.)

II. Types of Responses to Apparent
Violations

Depending on the facts and circumstances
of a particular case, an OFAC investigation
may lead to one or more of the following
actions:

A. No Action. If OFAC determines that
there is insufficient evidence to conclude
that a violation has occurred and/or, based
on an analysis of the General Factors
outlined in Section III of these Guidelines,
concludes that the conduct does not rise to
a level warranting an administrative
response, then no action will be taken. In
those cases in which OFAC is aware that the
Subject Person has knowledge of OFAC’s
investigation, OFAC generally will issue a
letter to the Subject Person indicating that
the investigation is being closed with no
administrative action being taken. A no-
action determination represents a final
determination as to the apparent violation,
unless OFAC later learns of additional
related violations or other relevant facts.

B. Request Additional Information. If
OFAC determines that additional information
regarding the apparent violation is needed, it
may request further information from the
Subject Person or third parties, including
through an administrative subpoena issued
pursuant to 31 CFR 501.602. In the case of
an institution subject to regulation where
OFAC has entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) with the Subject
Person’s regulator, OFAC will follow the
procedures set forth in such MOU regarding
consultation with the regulator. Even in the
absence of an MOU, OFAC may seek relevant
information about a regulated institution
and/or the conduct constituting the apparent
violation from the institution’s federal, state,

or foreign regulator. Upon receipt of
information determined to be sufficient to
assess the apparent violation, OFAC will
decide, based on an analysis of the General
Factors outlined in Section III of these
Guidelines, whether to pursue further
enforcement action or whether some other
response to the apparent violation is
appropriate.

C. Cautionary Letter: If OFAC determines
that there is insufficient evidence to
conclude that a violation has occurred or that
a Finding of Violation or a civil monetary
penalty is not warranted under the
circumstances, but believes that the
underlying conduct could lead to a violation
in other circumstances and/or that a Subject
Person does not appear to be exercising due
diligence in assuring compliance with the
statutes, Executive orders, and regulations
that OFAC enforces, OFAC may issue a
cautionary letter, which may convey OFAC’s
concerns about the underlying conduct and/
or the Subject Person’s OFAC compliance
policies, practices and/or procedures. A
cautionary letter represents a final
enforcement response to the apparent
violation, unless OFAC later learns of
additional related violations or other relevant
facts, but does not constitute a final agency
determination as to whether a violation has
occurred.

D. Finding of Violation: If OFAC
determines that a violation has occurred and
considers it important to document the
occurrence of a violation and, based on an
analysis of the General Factors outlined in
Section III of these Guidelines, concludes
that the Subject Person’s conduct warrants an
administrative response but that a civil
monetary penalty is not the most appropriate
response, OFAC may issue a Finding of
Violation that identifies the violation. A
Finding of Violation may also convey
OFAC’s concerns about the violation and/or
the Subject Person’s OFAC compliance
policies, practices and/or procedures, and/or
identify the need for further compliance
steps to be taken. A Finding of Violation
represents a final enforcement response to
the violation, unless OFAC later learns of
additional related violations or other relevant
facts, and constitutes a final agency
determination that a violation has occurred.
A Finding of Violation will afford the Subject
Person an opportunity to respond to OFAC’s
determination that a violation has occurred
before that determination becomes final. In
the event a Subject Person so responds, the
initial Finding of Violation will not
constitute a final agency determination that
a violation has occurred. In such cases, after
considering the response received, OFAC
will inform the Subject Person of its final
enforcement response to the apparent
violation.

E. Civil Monetary Penalty. If OFAC
determines that a violation has occurred and,
based on an analysis of the General Factors
outlined in Section III of these Guidelines,
concludes that the Subject Person’s conduct
warrants the imposition of a monetary
penalty, OFAC may impose a civil monetary
penalty. Civil monetary penalty amounts will
be determined as discussed in Section V of
these Guidelines. The imposition of a civil

monetary penalty constitutes a final agency
determination that a violation has occurred
and represents a final civil enforcement
response to the violation. OFAC will afford
the Subject Person an opportunity to respond
to OFAC’s determination that a violation has
occurred before a final penalty is imposed.

F. Criminal Referral. In appropriate
circumstances, OFAC may refer the matter to
appropriate law enforcement agencies for
criminal investigation and/or prosecution.
Apparent sanctions violations that OFAC has
referred for criminal investigation and/or
prosecution also may be subject to OFAC
civil penalty or other administrative action.

G. Other Administrative Actions. In
addition to or in lieu of other administrative
actions, OFAC may also take the following
administrative actions in response to an
apparent violation:

1. License Denial, Suspension,
Modification, or Revocation. OFAC
authorizations to engage in a transaction
(including the release of blocked funds)
pursuant to a general or specific license may
be withheld, denied, suspended, modified, or
revoked in response to an apparent violation.

2. Cease and Desist Order. OFAC may
order the Subject Person to cease and desist
from conduct that is prohibited by any of the
sanctions programs enforced by OFAC when
OFAC has reason to believe that a Subject
Person has engaged in such conduct and/or
that such conduct is ongoing or may recur.

III. General] Factors Affecting Administrative
Action

As a general matter, OFAC will consider
some or all of the following General Factors
in determining the appropriate
administrative action in response to an
apparent violation of U.S. sanctions by a
Subject Person, and, where a civil monetary
penalty is imposed, in determining the
appropriate amount of any such penalty:

A. Willful or Reckless Violation of Law: a
Subject Person’s willfulness or recklessness
in violating, attempting to violate, conspiring
to violate, or causing a violation of the law.
Generally, to the extent the conduct at issue
is the result of willful conduct or a deliberate
intent to violate, attempt to violate, conspire
to violate, or cause a violation of the law, the
OFAC enforcement response will be stronger.
Among the factors OFAC may consider in
evaluating willfulness or recklessness are:

1. Willfulness. Was the conduct at issue the
result of a decision to take action with the
knowledge that such action would constitute
a violation of U.S. law? Did the Subject
Person know that the underlying conduct
constituted, or likely constituted, a violation
of U.S. law at the time of the conduct?

2. Recklessness. Did the Subject Person
demonstrate reckless disregard for U.S.
sanctions requirements or otherwise fail to
exercise a minimal degree of caution or care
in avoiding conduct that led to the apparent
violation? Were there warning signs that
should have alerted the Subject Person that
an action or failure to act would lead to an
apparent violation?

3. Concealment. Was there an effort by the
Subject Person to hide or purposely obfuscate
its conduct in order to mislead OFAC,
Federal, State, or foreign regulators, or other
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57603

 

 

parties involved in the conduct about an
apparent violation?

4. Pattern of Conduct. Did the apparent
violation constitute or result from a pattern
or practice of conduct or was it relatively
isolated and atypical in nature?

5. Prior Notice. Was the Subject Person on
notice, or should it reasonably have been on
notice, that the conduct at issue, or similar
conduct, constituted a violation of U.S. law?

6. Management Involvement. In cases of
entities, at what level within the organization
did the willful or reckless conduct occur?
Were supervisory or managerial level staff
aware, or should they reasonably have been
aware, of the willful or reckless conduct?

B. Awareness of Conduct at Issue: the
Subject Person’s awareness of the conduct
giving rise to the apparent violation.
Generally, the greater a Subject Person’s
actual knowledge of, or reason to know
about, the conduct constituting an apparent
violation, the stronger the OFAC enforcement
response will be. In the case of a corporation,
awareness will focus on supervisory or
managerial level staff in the business unit at
issue, as well as other senior officers and
managers. Among the factors OFAC may
consider in evaluating the Subject Person’s
awareness of the conduct at issue are:

1. Actual Knowledge. Did the Subject
Person have actual knowledge that the
conduct giving rise to an apparent violation
took place? Was the conduct part of a
business process, structure or arrangement
that was designed or implemented with the
intent to prevent or shield the Subject Person
from having such actual knowledge, or was
the conduct part of a business process,
structure or arrangement implemented for
other legitimate reasons that made it difficult
or impossible for the Subject Person to have
actual knowledge?

2. Reason to Know. If the Subject Person
did not have actual knowledge that the
conduct took place, did the Subject Person
have reason to know, or should the Subject
Person reasonably have known, based on all
readily available information and with the
exercise of reasonable due diligence, that the
conduct would or might take place?

3. Management Involvement. In the case of
an entity, was the conduct undertaken with
the explicit or implicit knowledge of senior
management, or was the conduct undertaken
by personnel outside the knowledge of senior
management? If the apparent violation was
undertaken without the knowledge of senior
management, was there oversight intended to
detect and prevent violations, or did the lack
of knowledge by senior management result
from disregard for its responsibility to
comply with applicable sanctions laws?

C. Harm to Sanctions Program Objectives:
the actual or potential harm to sanctions
program objectives caused by the conduct
giving rise to the apparent violation. Among
the factors OFAC may consider in evaluating
the harm to sanctions program objectives are:

1. Economic or Other Benefit to the
Sanctioned Individual, Entity, or Country:
the economic or other benefit conferred or
attempted to be conferred to sanctioned
individuals, entities, or countries as a result
of an apparent violation, including the
number, size, and impact of the transactions

constituting an apparent violation(s), the
length of time over which they occurred, and
the nature of the economic or other benefit
conferred. OFAC may also consider the
causal link between the Subject Person’s
conduct and the economic benefit conferred
or attempted to be conferred.

2. Implications for U.S. Policy: the effect
that the circumstances of the apparent
violation had on the integrity of the U.S.
sanctions program and the related policy
objectives involved.

3. License Eligibility: whether the conduct
constituting the apparent violation likely
would have been licensed by OFAC under
existing licensing policy.

4. Humanitarian activity: whether the
conduct at issue was in support of a
humanitarian activity.

D. Individual Characteristics: the particular
circumstances and characteristics of a
Subject Person. Among the factors OFAC
may consider in evaluating individual
characteristics are:

1. Commercial Sophistication: the
commercial sophistication and experience of
the Subject Person. Is the Subject Person an
individual or an entity? If an individual, was
the conduct constituting the apparent
violation for personal or business reasons?

2. Size of Operations and Financial
Condition: the size of a Subject Person’s
business operations and overall financial
condition, where such information is
available and relevant. Qualification of the
Subject Person as a small business or
organization for the purposes of the Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness
Act, as determined by reference to the
applicable regulations of the Small Business
Administration, may also be considered.

3. Volume of Transactions: the total
volume of transactions undertaken by the
Subject Person on an annual basis, with
attention given to the apparent violations as
compared with the total volume.

4. Sanctions History: the Subject Person’s
sanctions history, including OFAC’s issuance
of prior penalties, findings of violations or
cautionary, warning or evaluative letters, or
other administrative actions (including
settlements). As a general matter, OFAC will
only consider a Subject Person’s sanctions
history for the five years preceding the date
of the transaction giving rise to the apparent
violation.

E. Compliance Program: the existence,
nature and adequacy of a Subject Person’s
tisk-based OFAC compliance program at the
time of the apparent violation, where
relevant. In the case of an institution subject
to regulation where OFAC has entered into
a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with the Subject Person’s regulator, OFAC
will follow the procedures set forth in such
MOU regarding consultation with the
regulator with regard to the quality and
effectiveness of the Subject Person’s
compliance program. Even in the absence of
an MOU, OFAC may take into consideration
the views of federal, state, or foreign
regulators, where relevant. Further
information about risk-based compliance
programs for financial institutions is set forth
in the annex hereto.

F. Remedial Response: the Subject Person’s
corrective action taken in response to the

apparent violation. Among the factors OFAC
may consider in evaluating the remedial
response are:

1. The steps taken by the Subject Person
upon learning of the apparent violation. Did
the Subject Person immediately stop the
conduct at issue?

2. In the case of an entity, the processes
followed to resolve issues related to the
apparent violation. Did the Subject Person
discover necessary information to ascertain
the causes and extent of the apparent
violation, fully and expeditiously? Was
senior management fully informed? If so,
when?

3. In the case of an entity, whether the
Subject Person adopted new and more
effective internal controls and procedures to
prevent a recurrence of the apparent
violation. If the Subject Person did not have
an OFAC compliance program in place at the
time of the apparent violation, did it
implement one upon discovery of the
apparent violations? If it did have an OFAC
compliance program, did it take appropriate
steps to enhance the program to prevent the
recurrence of similar violations? Did the
entity provide the individual(s) responsible
for the apparent violation with additional
training, and/or take other appropriate
action, to ensure that similar violations do
not occur in the future?

4. Where applicable, whether the Subject
Person undertook a thorough review to
identify other possible violations.

G. Cooperation with OFAC: the nature and
extent of the Subject Person’s cooperation
with OFAC. Among the factors OFAC may
consider in evaluating cooperation with
OFAC are:

1. Did the Subject Person voluntarily self-
disclose the apparent violation to OFAC?

2. Did the Subject Person provide OFAC
with all relevant information regarding an
apparent violation (whether or not
voluntarily self-disclosed)?

3. Did the Subject Person research and
disclose to OFAC relevant information
regarding any other apparent violations
caused by the same course of conduct?

4. Was information provided voluntarily or
in response to an administrative subpoena?

5. Did the Subject Person cooperate with,
and promptly respond to, all requests for
information?

6. Did the Subject Person enter into a
statute of limitations tolling agreement, if
requested by OFAC (particularly in situations
where the apparent violations were not
immediately notified to or discovered by
OFAC, in particularly complex cases, and in
cases in which the Subject Person has
requested and received additional time to
respond to a request for information from
OFAC)? If so, the Subject Person’s entering
into a tolling agreement will be deemed a
mitigating factor. Note: a Subject Person’s
refusal to enter into a tolling agreement will
not be considered by OFAC as an aggravating
factor in assessing a Subject Person’s
cooperation or otherwise under the
Guidelines.

Where appropriate, OFAC will publicly
note substantial cooperation provided by a
Subject Person.

H. Timing of apparent violation in relation
to imposition of sanctions: the timing of the
57604

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

apparent violation in relation to the adoption
of the applicable prohibitions, particularly if
the apparent violation took place
immediately after relevant changes in the
sanctions program regulations or the addition
of a new name to OFAC’s List of Specially
Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons
(SDN List).

I. Other enforcement action: other
enforcement actions taken by federal, state,
or local agencies against the Subject Person
for the apparent violation or similar apparent
violations, including whether the settlement
of alleged violations of OFAC regulations is
part of a comprehensive settlement with
other federal, state, or local agencies.

J. Future Compliance/Deterrence Effect: the
impact administrative action may have on
promoting future compliance with U.S.
economic sanctions by the Subject Person
and similar Subject Persons, particularly
those in the same industry sector.

K. Other relevant factors on a case-by-case
basis: such other factors that OFAC deems
relevant on a case-by-case basis in
determining the appropriate enforcement
response and/or the amount of any civil
monetary penalty. OFAC will consider the
totality of the circumstances to ensure that its
enforcement response is proportionate to the
nature of the violation.

IV. Civil Penalties for Failure To Comply
With a Requirement To Furnish Information
or Keep Records

As a general matter, the following civil
penalty amounts shall apply to a Subject
Person’s failure to comply with a
requirement to furnish information or
maintain records:

A. The failure to comply with a
requirement to furnish information pursuant
to 31 CFR 501.602 may result in a penalty in
an amount up to $20,000, irrespective of
whether any other violation is alleged. Where
OFAC has reason to believe that the apparent
violation(s) that is the subject of the
requirement to furnish information involves
a transaction(s) valued at greater than
$500,000, a failure to comply with a
requirement to furnish information may
result in a penalty in an amount up to
$50,000, irrespective of whether any other
violation is alleged. A failure to comply with
a requirement to furnish information may be
considered a continuing violation, and the
penalties described above may be imposed
each month that a party has continued to fail
to comply with the requirement to furnish
information. OFAC may also seek to have a
requirement to furnish information judicially
enforced. Imposition of a civil monetary
penalty for failure to comply with a
requirement to furnish information does not
preclude OFAC from seeking such judicial
enforcement of the requirement to furnish
information.

B. The late filing of a required report,
whether set forth in regulations or in a
specific license, may result in a civil
monetary penalty in an amount up to $2,500,
if filed within the first 30 days after the
report is due, and a penalty in an amount up
to $5,000 if filed more than 30 days after the
report is due. If the report relates to blocked
assets, the penalty may include an additional

$1,000 for every 30 days that the report is
overdue, up to five years.

C. The failure to maintain records in
conformance with the requirements of
OFAC’s regulations or of a specific license
may result in a penalty in an amount up to
$50,000.

V. Civil Penalties

OFAC will review the facts and
circumstances surrounding an apparent
violation and apply the General Factors for
Taking Administrative Action in Section III
above in determining whether to initiate a
civil penalty proceeding and in determining
the amount of any civil monetary penalty.
OFAC will give careful consideration to the
appropriateness of issuing a cautionary letter
or Finding of Violation in lieu of the
imposition of a civil monetary penalty.

A, Civil Penalty Process

1. Pre-Penalty Notice. If OFAC has reason
to believe that a sanctions violation has
occurred and believes that a civil monetary
penalty is appropriate, it will issue a Pre-
Penalty Notice in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the particular
regulations governing the conduct giving rise
to the apparent violation. The amount of the
proposed penalty set forth in the Pre-Penalty
Notice will reflect OFAC’s preliminary
assessment of the appropriate penalty
amount, based on information then in
OFAC’s possession. The amount of the final
penalty may change as OFAC learns
additional relevant information. If, after
issuance of a Pre-Penalty Notice, OFAC
determines that a penalty in an amount that
represents an increase of more than 10
percent from the proposed penalty set forth
in the Pre-Penalty Notice is appropriate, or if
OFAC intends to allege additional violations,
it will issue a revised Pre-Penalty Notice
setting forth the new proposed penalty
amount and/or alleged violations.

a. In general, the Pre-Penalty Notice will
set forth the following with respect to the
specific violations alleged and the proposed
penalties:

i. Description of the alleged violations,
including the number of violations and their
value, for which a penalty is being proposed;

ii. Identification of the regulatory or other
provisions alleged to have been violated;

iii. Identification of the base category
(defined below) according to which the
proposed penalty amount was calculated and
the General Factors that were most relevant
to the determination of the proposed penalty
amount;

iv. The maximum amount of the penalty to
which the Subject Person could be subject
under applicable law; and

v. The proposed penalty amount,
determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in these Guidelines.

b. The Pre-Penalty Notice will also include
information regarding how to respond to the
Pre-Penalty Notice including:

i. A statement that the Subject Person may
submit a written response to the Pre-Penalty
Notice by a date certain addressing the
alleged violation(s), the General Factors
Affecting Administrative Action set forth in
Section III of these Guidelines, and any other

information or evidence that the Subject
Person deems relevant to OFAC’s
consideration.

ii. A statement that a failure to respond to
the Pre-Penalty Notice may result in the
imposition of a civil monetary penalty.

2. Response to Pre-Penalty Notice. A
Subject Person may submit a written
response to the Pre-Penalty Notice in
accordance with the procedures set forth in
the particular regulations governing the
conduct giving rise to the apparent violation.
Generally, the response should either agree to
the proposed penalty set forth in the Pre-
Penalty Notice or set forth reasons why a
penalty should not be imposed or, if
imposed, why it should be a lesser amount
than proposed, with particular attention paid
to the General Factors Affecting
Administrative Action set forth in Section III
of these Guidelines. The response should
include all documentary or other evidence
available to the Subject Person that supports
the arguments set forth in the response.
OFAC will consider all relevant materials
submitted.

3. Penalty Notice. If OFAC receives no
response to a Pre-Penalty Notice within the
time prescribed in the Pre-Penalty Notice, or
if following the receipt of a response to a Pre-
Penalty Notice and a review of the
information and evidence contained therein
OFAC concludes that a civil monetary
penalty is warranted, a Penalty Notice
generally will be issued in accordance with
the procedures set forth in the particular
regulations governing the conduct giving rise
to the violation. A Penalty Notice constitutes
a final agency determination that a violation
has occurred. The penalty amount set forth
in the Penalty Notice will take into account
relevant additional information provided in
response to a Pre-Penalty Notice. In the
absence of a response to a Pre-Penalty Notice,
the penalty amount set forth in the Penalty
Notice will generally be the same as the
proposed penalty set forth in the Pre-Penalty
Notice.

4. Referral to Financial Management
Division. The imposition of a civil monetary
penalty pursuant to a Penalty Notice creates
a debt due the U.S. Government. OFAC will
advise Treasury’s Financial Management
Division upon the imposition of a penalty.
The Financial Management Division may
take follow-up action to collect the penalty
assessed if it is not paid within the
prescribed time period set forth in the
Penalty Notice. In addition or instead, the
matter may be referred to the U.S.
Department of Justice for appropriate action
to recover the penalty.

5. Final Agency Action. The issuance of a
Penalty Notice constitutes final agency action
with respect to the violation(s) for which the
penalty is assessed.

B. Amount of Civil Penalty

1. Egregious case. In those cases in which
a civil monetary penalty is deemed
appropriate, OFAC will make a
determination as to whether a case is deemed
“egregious” for purposes of the base penalty
calculation. This determination will be based
on an analysis of the applicable General
Factors. In making the egregiousness
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57605

 

 

determination, OFAC generally will give
substantial weight to General Factors A
(“willful or reckless violation of law’’), B
(“awareness of conduct at issue’), C (“harm
to sanctions program objectives”) and D
(“individual characteristics”), with particular
emphasis on General Factors A and B. A case
will be considered an ‘“‘egregious case” where
the analysis of the applicable General
Factors, with a focus on those General
Factors identified above, indicates that the
case represents a particularly serious
violation of the law calling for a strong
enforcement response. A determination that
a case is “egregious” will be made by the
Director or Deputy Director.

2. Pre-Penalty Notice. The penalty amount
proposed in a Pre-Penalty Notice shall
generally be calculated as follows, except
that neither the base amount nor the
proposed penalty will exceed the applicable
statutory maximum amount: ®

6For apparent violations identified in the Cuba
Penalty Schedule, 68 Fed. Reg. 4429 (Jan. 29, 2003),
for which a civil monetary penalty has been
deemed appropriate, the base penalty amount shall

a. Base Category Calculation

i. In a non-egregious case, if the apparent
violation is disclosed through a voluntary
self-disclosure by the Subject Person, the
base amount of the proposed civil penalty in
the Pre-Penalty Notice shall be one-half of
the transaction value, capped at a maximum
base amount of $125,000 per violation
(except in the case of transactions subject to
the Trading With the Enemy Act, in which
case the base amount of the proposed civil
penalty will be capped at the lesser of
$125,000 or one-half of the maximum
statutory penalty under TWEA, which at the
time of publication of these Guidelines
equaled $32,500 per violation).

ii. In a non-egregious case, if the apparent
violation comes to OFAC’s attention by
means other than a voluntary self-disclosure,
the base amount of the proposed civil penalty
in the Pre-Penalty Notice shall be the

equal the amount set forth in the Schedule for such
violation, except that the base penalty amount shall
be reduced by 50% in cases of voluntary self-
disclosure.

“applicable schedule amount,” as defined
above (capped at a maximum base amount of
$250,000 per violation, or, in the case of
transactions subject to the Trading With the
Enemy Act, capped at the lesser of $250,000
or the maximum statutory penalty under
TWEA, which at the time of publication of
these Guidelines equaled a maximum of
$65,000 per violation).

iii. In an egregious case, if the apparent
violation is disclosed through a voluntary
self-disclosure by a Subject Person, the base
amount of the proposed civil penalty in the
Pre-Penalty Notice shall be one-half of the
applicable statutory maximum penalty
applicable to the violation.

iv. In an egregious case, if the apparent
violation comes to OFAC’s attention by
means other than a voluntary self-disclosure,
the base amount of the proposed civil penalty
in the Pre-Penalty Notice shall be the
applicable statutory maximum penalty
amount applicable to the violation.

The following matrix represents the base
amount of the proposed civil penalty for each
category of violation:
 

 

 

 

57606 Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations
BASE PENALTY MATRIX
Egregious Case
NO YES
(1) (3)
YES One-Half of One-Half of
Transaction Value Applicable Statutory Maximum
(capped at $125,000 per violation/
Voluntary $32,500 per TWEA violation)
Seif-
Disclosure (2) (4)
Applicable Schedule Amount Applicable Statutory Maximum
NO (capped at $250,000 per violation/
$65,000 per TWEA violation)

 

 

 

 

Where the base penalty amount would otherwise exceed the statutory maximum civil

penalty amount applicable to an apparent violation, the base penalty amount shail

equal such applicable statutory maximum amount.

b. Adjustment for Applicable Relevant
General Factors

The base amount of the proposed civil
penalty may be adjusted to reflect applicable
General Factors for Administrative Action set
forth in Section III of these Guidelines. Each
factor may be considered mitigating or
aggravating, resulting in a lower or higher
proposed penalty amount. As a general
matter, in those cases where the following
General Factors are present, OFAC will
adjust the base proposed penalty amount in
the following manner:

i. In cases involving substantial
cooperation with OFAC but no voluntary
self-disclosure as defined herein, including
cases in which an apparent violation is
reported to OFAC by a third party but the
Subject Person provides substantial
additional information regarding the
apparent violation and/or other related
violations, the base penalty amount generally
will be reduced between 25 and 40 percent.
Substantial cooperation in cases involving

voluntary self-disclosure may also be
considered as a further mitigating factor.

ii. In cases involving a Subject Person’s
first violation, the base penalty amount
generally will be reduced up to 25 percent.
An apparent violation generally will be
considered a ‘‘first violation” if the Subject
Person has not received a penalty notice or
Finding of Violation from OFAC in the five
years preceding the date of the transaction
giving rise to the apparent violation. A group
of substantially similar apparent violations
addressed in a single Pre-Penalty Notice shall
be considered as a single violation for
purposes of this subsection. In those cases
where a prior penalty notice or Finding of
Violation within the preceding five years
involved conduct of a substantially different
nature from the apparent violation at issue,
OFAC may consider the apparent violation at
issue a ‘‘first violation.” In determining the
extent of any mitigation for a first violation,
OFAC may consider any prior OFAC
enforcement action taken with respect to the
Subject Person, including any cautionary,

warning or evaluative letters issued, or any
civil monetary settlements entered into with
OFAC.

In all cases, the proposed penalty amount
will not exceed the applicable statutory
maximum.

In cases involving a large number of
apparent violations, where the transaction
value of all apparent violations is either
unknown or would require a
disproportionate allocation of resources to
determine, OFAC may estimate or extrapolate
the transaction value of the total universe of
apparent violations in determining the
amount of any proposed civil monetary
penalty.

3. Penalty Notice. The amount of the
proposed civil penalty in the Pre-Penalty
Notice will be the presumptive starting point
for calculation of the civil penalty amount in
the Penalty Notice. OFAC may adjust the
penalty amount in the Penalty Notice based
on:

a. Evidence presented by the Subject
Person in response to the Pre-Penalty Notice,
Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

57607

 

 

or otherwise received by OFAC with respect
to the underlying violation(s); and/or

b. Any modification resulting from further
review and reconsideration by OFAC of the
proposed civil monetary penalty in light of
the General Factors for Administrative
Action set forth in Section III above.

In no event will the amount of the civil
monetary penalty in the Penalty Notice
exceed the proposed penalty set forth in the
Pre-Penalty Notice by more than 10 percent,
or include additional alleged violations,
unless a revised Pre-Penalty Notice has first
been sent to the Subject Person as set forth
above. In the event that OFAC determines
upon further review that no penalty is
appropriate, it will so inform the Subject
Person in a no-action letter, a cautionary
letter, or a Finding of Violation.

C. Settlements

A settlement does not constitute a final
agency determination that a violation has
occurred.

1. Settlement Process. Settlement
discussions may be initiated by OFAC, the
Subject Person or the Subject Person’s
authorized representative. Settlements
generally will be negotiated in accordance
with the principles set forth in these
Guidelines with respect to appropriate
penalty amounts. OFAC may condition the
entry into or continuation of settlement
negotiations on the execution of a tolling
agreement with respect to the statute of
limitations.

2. Settlement Prior to Issuance of Pre-
Penalty Notice. Where settlement discussions
occur prior to the issuance of a Pre-Penalty
Notice, the Subject Person may request in
writing that OFAC withhold issuance of a
Pre-Penalty Notice pending the conclusion of
settlement discussions. OFAC will generally
agree to such a request as long as settlement
discussions are continuing in good faith and
the statute of limitations is not at risk of
expiring.

3. Settlement Following Issuance of Pre-
Penalty Notice. If a matter is settled after a

OFAC RISK MATRIX

Pre-Penalty Notice has been issued, but
before a final Penalty Notice is issued, OFAC
will not make a final determination as to
whether a sanctions violation has occurred.
In the event no settlement is reached, the
period specified for written response to the
Pre-Penalty Notice remains in effect unless
additional time is granted by OFAC.

4. Settlements of Multiple Apparent
Violations. A settlement initiated for one
apparent violation may also involve a
comprehensive or global settlement of
multiple apparent violations covered by
other Pre-Penalty Notices, apparent
violations for which a Pre-Penalty Notice has
not yet been issued by OFAC, or previously
unknown apparent violations reported to
OFAC during the pendency of an
investigation of an apparent violation.

Annex

The following matrix can be used by
financial institutions to evaluate their
compliance programs:

 

Low

Moderate

High

 

Stable, well-known customer base in a localized
environment.

Few high-risk customers; these may include
nonresident aliens, foreign customers (includ-
ing accounts with U.S. powers of attorney),
and foreign commercial customers.

No overseas branches and no correspondent
accounts with foreign banks.

No electronic services (e.g., e-banking) offered,
or products available are purely informational
or non-transactional.

Limited number of funds transfers for customers
and non-customers, limited third-party trans-
actions, and no international funds transfers.

No other types of international transactions,
such as trade finance, cross-border ACH, and
management of sovereign debt.

No history of OFAC actions. No evidence of ap-
parent violation or circumstances that might
lead to a violation.

Management has fully assessed the institution’s
level of risk based on its customer base and
product lines. This understanding of risk and
strong commitment to OFAC compliance is
satisfactorily communicated throughout the or-
ganization.

The board of directors, or board committee, has
approved an OFAC compliance program that
includes policies, procedures, controls, and
information systems that are adequate, and
consistent with the institution’s OFAC risk pro-
file.

Staffing levels appear adequate to properly exe-
cute the OFAC compliance program.

Authority and accountability for OFAC compli-
ance are clearly defined and enforced, includ-
ing the designation of a qualified OFAC offi-
cer.

Customer base changing due to branching,
merger, or acquisition in the domestic mar-
ket.

A moderate number of high-risk customers ....

Overseas branches or correspondent ac-
counts with foreign banks.

The institution offers limited electronic (e.g.,
e-banking) products and services.

A moderate number of funds transfers, mostly
for customers. Possibly, a few international
funds transfers from personal or business
accounts.

Limited other types of international trans-
actions.

A small number of recent actions (i.e., actions
within the last five years) by OFAC, includ-
ing notice letters, or civil money penalties,
with evidence that the institution addressed
the issues and is not at risk of similar viola-
tions in the future.

Management exhibits a reasonable under-
standing of the key aspects of OFAC com-
pliance and its commitment is generally
clear and _ satisfactorily communicated
throughout the organization, but it may lack
a program appropriately tailored to risk.

The board has approved an OFAC compli-
ance program that includes most of the ap-
propriate policies, procedures, controls, and
information systems necessary to ensure
compliance, but some weaknesses are
noted.

Staffing levels appear generally adequate, but
some deficiencies are noted.

Authority and accountability are defined, but
some refinements are needed. A qualified
OFAC officer has been designated.

 

 

A large, fluctuating client base in an inter-
national environment.

A large number of high-risk customers.

Overseas branches or multiple correspondent
accounts with foreign banks.

The institution offers a wide array of elec-
tronic (e.g., e-banking) products and serv-
ices (1.e., account transfers, e-bill payment,
or accounts opened via the Internet).

A high number of customer and non-customer
funds transfers, including international
funds transfers.

A high number of other types of international
transactions.

Multiple recent actions by OFAC, where the
institution has not addressed the issues,
thus leading to an increased risk of the in-
stitution undertaking similar violations in the
future.

Management does not understand, or has
chosen to ignore, key aspects of OFAC
compliance risk. The importance of compli-
ance is not emphasized or communicated
throughout the organization.

The board has not approved an OFAC com-
pliance program, or policies, procedures,
controls, and information systems are sig-
nificantly deficient.

Management has failed to provide appropriate
staffing levels to handle workload.

Authority and accountability for compliance
have not been clearly established. No
OFAC compliance officer, or an unqualified
one, has been appointed. The role of the
OFAC officer is unclear.
57608

Federal Register/Vol. 74, No. 215/Monday, November 9, 2009/Rules and Regulations

 

 

OFAC RISK MATRIX—Continued

 

Low

Moderate

High

 

Training is appropriate and effective based on
the institution’s risk profile, covers applicable
personnel, and provides necessary up-to-date
information and resources to ensure compli-
ance.

The institution employs strong quality control
methods.

Training is conducted and management pro-
vides adequate resources given the risk
profile of the organization; however, some
areas are not covered within the training
program.

The institution employs limited quality control
methods.

 

 

Training is sporadic and does not cover im-
portant regulatory and risk areas or is non-
existent.

The institution does not employ quality control
methods.
