<meta property="og:description" content="&nbsp;


Basic Information on OFAC and Sanctions


1. What is OFAC and what does it do?

The Office of Foreign Assets Control administers and enforces economic sanctions programs primarily against countries and groups of individuals, such as terrorists and narcotics traffickers. The sanctions can be either comprehensive or selective, using the blocking of assets and trade restrictions to accomplish foreign policy and national security goals. [09-10-02]



2. How long has OFAC been around?

The Treasury Department has a long history of dealing with sanctions. Dating back prior to the War of 1812, Secretary of the Treasury Gallatin administered sanctions imposed against Great Britain for the harassment of American sailors. During the Civil War, Congress approved a law which prohibited transactions with the Confederacy, called for the forfeiture of goods involved in such transactions, and provided a licensing regime under rules and regulations administered by Treasury.

OFAC is the successor to the Office of Foreign Funds Control (the &quot;FFC''), which was established at the advent of World War II following the German invasion of Norway in 1940. The FFC program was administered by the Secretary of the Treasury throughout the war. The FFC's initial purpose was to prevent Nazi use of the occupied countries' holdings of foreign exchange and securities and to prevent forced repatriation of funds belonging to nationals of those countries. These controls were later extended to protect assets of other invaded countries. After the United States formally entered World War II, the FFC played a leading role in economic warfare against the Axis powers by blocking enemy assets and prohibiting foreign trade and financial transactions.

OFAC itself was formally created in December 1950, following the entry of China into the Korean War, when President Truman declared a national emergency and blocked all Chinese and North Korean assets subject to U.S. jurisdiction. [05-02-06]



3. What does one mean by the term &quot;prohibited transactions&quot;?

Prohibited transactions are trade or financial transactions and other dealings in which U.S. persons may not engage unless authorized by OFAC or expressly exempted by statute. Because each program is based on different foreign policy and national security goals, prohibitions may vary between programs. [06-16-06]



4. Are there exceptions to the prohibitions?

Yes. OFAC regulations often provide general licenses authorizing the performance of certain categories of transactions. OFAC also issues specific licenses on a case-by-case basis under certain limited situations and conditions. Guidance on how to request a specific license is found below and at 31 C.F.R. 501.801.

To apply for a specific license, please go to our License Application Page. [06-16-06]



6. Where can I find the specific details about the embargoes?

A summary description of each particular embargo or sanctions program may be found in the&nbsp;Sanctions Programs and Country Information&nbsp;area and in the&nbsp;Guidance and Information for Industry Groups&nbsp;area on OFAC's website. The text of Legal documents may be found in the Legal Documents area of OFAC's website which contains the text of 31 C.F.R. Chapter V and appropriate amendments to that Chapter which have appeared in the Federal Register. [05-21-18]



7. Can I get permission from OFAC to transact or trade with an embargoed country?

OFAC usually has the authority by means of a specific license to permit a person or entity to engage in a transaction which otherwise would be prohibited. In some cases, however, legislation may restrict that authority.

To apply for a specific license, please go to our License Application Page. [09-10-02]



8. What must I do to get permission to trade with an embargoed country?

In some situations, authority to engage in certain transactions is provided by means of a general license. In instances where a general license does not exist, a written request for a specific license must be filed with OFAC. The request must conform to the procedures set out in the regulations pertaining to the particular sanctions program. Generally, application guidelines and requirements must be strictly followed, and all necessary information must be included in the application in order for OFAC to consider an application. For an explanation about the difference between a general and a specific license as well as answers to other licensing questions, see the licensing questions section.

To apply for a specific license, please go to our License Application Page. [09-10-02]



9. What do you mean by &quot;blocking?&quot;

Another word for it is &quot;freezing.&quot; It is simply a way of controlling targeted property. Title to the blocked property remains with the target, but the exercise of powers and privileges normally associated with ownership is prohibited without authorization from OFAC. Blocking immediately imposes an across-the-board prohibition against transfers or dealings of any kind with regard to the property. [09-10-02]



10. What countries do I need to worry about in terms of U.S. sanctions?

OFAC administers a number of U.S. economic sanctions and embargoes that target geographic regions and governments. Some programs are comprehensive in nature and block the government and include broad-based trade restrictions, while others target specific individuals and entities. (Please see the  Sanctions Programs and Country Information page for information on specific programs.) It is important to note that in non-comprehensive programs, there may be broad prohibitions on dealings with countries, and also against specific named individuals and entities. The names are incorporated into OFAC s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (&quot;SDN list&quot;) which includes approximately 6,400 names of companies and individuals who are connected with the sanctions targets. In addition, OFAC maintains other sanctions lists that may have different prohibitions associated with them. A number of the named individuals and entities are known to move from country to country and may end up in locations where they would be least expected. U.S. persons are prohibited from dealing with SDNs wherever they are located and all SDN assets are blocked. Entities that a person on the SDN List owns (defined as a direct or indirect ownership interest of 50% or more) are also blocked, regardless of whether that entity is separately named on the SDN List. Because OFAC's programs are dynamic, it is very important to check OFAC's website on a regular basis to ensure that your sanctions lists are current and you have complete information regarding the latest restrictions affecting countries and parties with which you plan to do business. [05-21-18]



11. Who must comply with OFAC regulations?

U.S. persons must comply with OFAC regulations, including all U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens regardless of where they are located, all persons and entities within the United States, all U.S. incorporated entities and their foreign branches. In the cases of certain programs, foreign subsidiaries owned or controlled by U.S. companies also must comply. Certain programs also require foreign persons in possession of U.S.-origin goods to comply. [01-15-15]



12. How much are the fines for violating these regulations?

The fines for violations can be substantial. In many cases, civil and criminal penalties can exceed several million dollars.&nbsp; Civil penalties vary by sanctions program, and the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990, as amended by the Federal Civil Penalty Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015, requires OFAC to adjust civil monetary penalty amounts annually.&nbsp; For current penalty amounts, see section V.B.2.a of Appendix A to OFAC;s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines at 31 C.F.R Part 501.&nbsp; [03-08-17]



13. How can I report a possible violation of OFAC regulations by my company to OFAC? &nbsp;Will I receive &quot;amnesty&quot; if I report a possible violation to OFAC or if my failure to comply with OFAC regulations was inadvertent?

OFAC encourages anyone who may have violated OFAC-administered regulations to disclose the apparent violation to OFAC voluntarily. &nbsp;Voluntary self-disclosure to OFAC is considered a mitigating factor by OFAC in enforcement actions, and pursuant to OFAC’s Enforcement Guidelines, will result in a reduction in the base amount of any proposed civil penalty. &nbsp;

Please submit all voluntary self-disclosures electronically to OFACDisclosures@treasury.gov. &nbsp;Unless the disclosure is an initial disclosure which will be supplemented with additional information, the submission should contain sufficient detail to afford OFAC a complete understanding of an apparent violation’s circumstances. &nbsp;Please review the Office of Compliance and Enforcement (“OCE”) Data Delivery Standards Guidance: Preferred Practices for Productions to OFAC, which details OFAC’s preferred technical standards for formatting electronic document productions submitted to OCE.

OFAC does not have an &quot;amnesty&quot; program. &nbsp;OFAC does, however, review the totality of the circumstances surrounding any apparent violation, including whether a matter was voluntarily self-disclosed to OFAC. &nbsp;OFAC will also consider the existence, nature, and adequacy of a subject person’s risk-based OFAC compliance program at the time of the apparent violation, where relevant, among other factors. &nbsp;Please see OFAC’s Enforcement Guidelines for additional information regarding voluntary self-disclosures and other mitigating factors, as well as the agency’s general framework for the enforcement of economic sanctions programs administered by OFAC. [12-04-20]



14. Can I regard previously issued and published opinion letters, regulatory interpretations, or other statements as guidance for my transactions?

Great care should be taken when placing reliance on such materials to ensure that the transactions in question fully conform to the letter and spirit of the published materials and that the materials have not been superseded. [09-10-02]



15. Can OFAC change its previously stated, non-published interpretation or opinion without first giving public notice?

Yes. OFAC, therefore, strongly encourages parties to exercise due diligence when their business activities may touch on an OFAC-administered program and to contact OFAC if they have any questions about their transactions. [09-10-02]



91.&nbsp;I am looking for the terrorist list on your web site so my company can comply with U.S. law.&nbsp; Where can I find this list?

OFAC s regulations are broader than the specific laws dealing with terrorists and persons who support them.&nbsp; All individuals and entities that fall under U.S. jurisdiction should use OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List).&nbsp; This list includes specially designated global terrorists and narcotics traffickers, among other designated persons, and is available on OFAC s website.&nbsp; In addition, OFAC maintains other sanctions lists that may have different prohibitions associated with each that apply to U.S. persons or transactions otherwise subject to U.S. jurisdiction.&nbsp; It is important to note that some OFAC sanctions block categories of persons even if those persons do not appear on the SDN List.&nbsp; For example, this is the case for any person that meets the definition of the  Government of Venezuela in Executive Order 13884 of August 5, 2019 ( Blocking Property of the Government of Venezuela ).&nbsp; It is also important to note that OFAC s Cuba sanctions prohibit most transactions with Cuban nationals, wherever located.&nbsp; U.S. persons are expected to exercise due diligence in determining whether any such persons are involved in a proposed transaction. [08-11-2020]



126.&nbsp;I tried to ship a package and it was returned to me because of&nbsp;OFAC sanctions.&nbsp; Why?

There may have been one or more reasons the package was rejected.&nbsp; For example, was it destined for Cuba and lacking a description of the contents?&nbsp; Was it an unlicensed commercial shipment destined for North Korea?&nbsp; Was it a personal gift destined for an individual in Iran with a stated value exceeding $100?&nbsp; These examples are legitimate reasons for shipping companies to refuse to process such packages, such as packages that do not conform with shipping company guidelines and rules, as well as OFAC and other U.S. government regulations.&nbsp; Not only could you be liable for attempting to send such packages, but the shipping companies also could be liable for their role in processing these.&nbsp; See OFAC s country program webpages for more information on the restrictions on shipments to high-risk jurisdictions, for example the Crimea region of Ukraine, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, or Syria. [08-11-2020]



127. I tried to ship a package and it was &quot;blocked&quot; by the shipping company &quot;due to OFAC sanctions.&quot; Why? And how can I get the package unblocked?

Shipping companies are required to &quot;block&quot; packages in which a Specially Designated National (&quot;SDN&quot;) or other blocked person has an interest. When a package is required to be &quot;blocked,&quot; the shipper must retain the package rather than reject and return it to the sender. Blocking is not required if a general or specific license from OFAC authorizes the shipper to reject or process the package, or if the transaction is otherwise exempted from the prohibitions based on the type or content of the package. To request a license for the package s release, apply online or send a letter with a detailed description of the package s contents and an explanation of the parties involved in the transaction, along with a copy of the package s air waybill or Customs Declaration and Dispatch form, to:

U.S. Department of the Treasury
Office of Foreign Assets Control
Licensing Division
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220

[02-07-2011]


468. How do I verify an OFAC document? For example, how do I know that an OFAC license or a Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List removal letter is authentic?

If you have questions about the authenticity of an OFAC document that is not publically posted on the OFAC website, you can contact OFAC and reference the specific case ID or FAC number that is included on the document.

To verify a specific license, please contact the OFAC Licensing Division at 1-202-622-2480.
	To verify an SDN removal letter, please email ofac.reconsideration@treasury.gov.
	To verify another OFAC document, please contact the OFAC Compliance Division at 1-202-622-2490.

[04-21-2016]


469. Does OFAC issue certificates of non-inclusion to help prove that a name is not on one of OFAC's sanctions lists?

No, OFAC does not issue non-inclusion certificates. [04-21-2016]

906. What do Iran General License (GL) N, Syria GL 21, and Venezuela GL 39 authorize with respect to the fight against the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)? &nbsp;How do these GLs differ from OFAC’s existing humanitarian exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations?

In order to further aid the global fight against COVID-19, OFAC has issued time-limited general licenses, Iran GL N, Syria GL 21, and Venezuela GL 39 (together, the COVID-19-related GLs), to provide broad authorizations for certain COVID-19-related transactions and activities. &nbsp;The new general licenses expand upon longstanding humanitarian exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations in OFAC sanctions programs, which remain in effect (see OFAC’s April 16, 2020 Fact Sheet on the Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Trade to Combat COVID-19) to cover additional COVID 19-related transactions and activities. &nbsp;For example, Iran GL N expands authorizations under the Iran sanctions program to cover certain items that previously would have required a specific license for exportation or reexportation to Iran, such as certain COVID-19 testing or vaccine manufacturing equipment. &nbsp;Both U.S. persons and non-U.S. persons whose activities are within U.S. jurisdiction — including exporters, nongovernmental organizations, international organizations, and financial institutions — may rely upon the authorizations in these COVID-19-related GLs provided they meet the applicable conditions. &nbsp;All three GLs expire on June 17, 2022.

The COVID-19-related GLs provide authorization that is independent of OFAC’s other humanitarian-related authorizations. &nbsp;Accordingly, conditions and limitations included in other humanitarian-related authorizations do not apply to transactions and activities conducted pursuant to the COVID-19-related GLs, unless explicitly incorporated therein. &nbsp;For example, for sales to Iran of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices pursuant to the general license in 31 C.F.R. § 560.530, payment terms and financing must be limited to and consistent with those authorized by 31 C.F.R. § 560.532. &nbsp;However, because Iran GL N does not incorporate similar limitations on payment terms, COVID-19-related exports and reexports to Iran authorized by Iran GL N are not subject to the payment terms in 31 C.F.R. § 560.532.

Prior to the expiration of the COVID-19-related GLs, OFAC may issue additional guidance, as appropriate. &nbsp;OFAC’s longstanding humanitarian exemptions, exceptions and authorizations in each of these sanctions programs will not be impacted by the expiration of these GLs. &nbsp;For transactions not otherwise authorized or exempt, OFAC considers license requests on a case-by-case basis and prioritizes applications, compliance questions, and other requests related to humanitarian support for people in areas subject to comprehensive sanctions. [06-16-2021]

907.&nbsp;For the purposes of Iran General License (GL) N, what are goods or technology for use in connection with the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)? &nbsp;What transactions and activities related to the export or reexport of these items are authorized?

For the purposes of Iran GL N, covered COVID-19-related goods or technology include, for example: &nbsp;medical gowns; medical eye shields and goggles; surgical gloves; face shields; respirators and masks such as N95, N99, and N100 masks; personal hygiene products such as soap and hand sanitizer and other water, sanitation, and hygiene supplies such as: water purification supplies and hygiene promotion materials; vaccines and vaccine ingredients or components required for the production of vaccines; equipment, supplies, and containers for transporting, storing, and administering vaccines; COVID-19 testing kits and equipment, and software and technology for processing such kits; equipment, software, and technology for diagnostic imaging tests; ventilators or components thereof; oxygen tanks and supplies to deliver oxygen; supplies, medicines, or other therapies to treat COVID-19; and field hospitals or mobile medical units, provided that all conditions and limitations of Iran GL N are satisfied, including with regard to the classification of certain goods and technology set forth in paragraph (d)(1) of Iran GL N. &nbsp;Certain COVID-19-related medical devices designated as EAR99 that would otherwise require a specific license for exportation or reexportation to Iran because they are included on OFAC’s List of Medical Devices Requiring Specific Authorization — such as High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filtration Systems and HEPA filters — would not require a specific license for exportation or reexportation to Iran, provided that all conditions and limitations of Iran GL N are satisfied.

Transactions and activities related to the exportation, reexportation, sale, or supply of such goods or technology include, for example: &nbsp;processing and transfer of funds; payment of taxes, fees, and import duties; purchase or receipt of permits, licenses, or public utility services; making of shipping and cargo inspection arrangements; obtaining of insurance; arrangement of financing and payment; shipping and storage of the goods; receipt of payment; and entry into contracts (including executory contracts), provided that all conditions and limitations of Iran GL N are satisfied. &nbsp;Certain transactions and activities involving the Central Bank of Iran (CBI), the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), or any entity in which NIOC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, are also authorized under Iran GL N.

As noted in Iran GL N, this general license does not authorize the unblocking of any property blocked pursuant to any part of 31 CFR chapter V, including property of the Government of Iran. [06-16-2021]

908.&nbsp;For the purposes of Iran General License (GL) N and Syria GL 21, what are services related to the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)? &nbsp;What transactions and activities related to the export or, in the case of Iran GL N, import of these services are authorized?

For the purposes of Iran GL N and Syria GL 21, services related to the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19 include, for example: &nbsp;treatment of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19; training necessary for the safe and effective use, repair, or maintenance of goods for use in connection with the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19; water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion materials and supplies, and shelter activities to prevent or treat COVID-19, including Risk Communication and Community Engagement efforts related to COVID-19, and other goods and services, directly related to prevention or treatment of COVID-19; conduct of research into COVID-19; services necessary for the operation, maintenance, or repair of goods for use in connection with the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19; collaboration on the development or enhancement of information related to COVID-19 to the extent not authorized or exempt; development of medical devices or medicines to counteract COVID-19; conduct of clinical studies in connection with COVID-19; provision of public education in connection with COVID-19; and disposal of medical waste in connection with COVID-19, provided all conditions and limitations of Iran GL N or Syria GL 21 are satisfied.

Transactions and activities related to the exportation or reexportation of such services include, for example: &nbsp;processing and transfer of funds; payment of taxes, fees, and import duties; purchase or receipt of permits, licenses, or public utility services; making of shipping or cargo inspection arrangements; obtaining of insurance; arrangement of financing and payment; delivery of services; receipt of payment; and entry into contracts (including executory contracts), provided all conditions of Iran GL N or Syria GL 21 are satisfied.

As noted in Iran GL N and Syria GL 21, these general licenses do not authorize the unblocking of any property blocked pursuant to any part of 31 CFR chapter V, including property of the Government of Iran or property of the Government of Syria. [06-16-2021]

909.&nbsp;For the purposes of Venezuela General License (GL) 39, what are transactions and activities related to the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)?

For the purposes of Venezuela GL 39, transactions and activities related to the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19 in Venezuela include, for example: &nbsp;the export or import of goods and services, and transactions and activities related thereto, in each case that would otherwise be prohibited due to the involvement of the Government of Venezuela, certain blocked financial institutions as described in Venezuela GL 39, or both, provided all conditions and limitations in the GL are satisfied.

COVID-19-related goods or technology include, for example: &nbsp;medical gowns; medical eye shields and goggles; surgical gloves; face shields; respirators and masks such as N95, N99, and N100 masks; personal hygiene products such as soap and hand sanitizer and other water, sanitation, and hygiene supplies; vaccines and vaccine ingredients or components required for the production of vaccines; equipment, supplies, and containers for transporting, storing, and administering vaccines; personal protective equipment; COVID-19 testing kits and equipment, software and technology for processing such kits; equipment, software, and technology for diagnostic imaging tests; ventilators or components thereof; oxygen tanks and supplies to deliver oxygen; supplies, medicines, or other therapies to treat COVID-19; and field hospitals or mobile medicals units, provided that all conditions and limitations of Venezuela GL 39 are satisfied.

COVID-19-related services include, for example: &nbsp;treatment of patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19; training necessary to the safe and effective use of goods for use in connection with the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19; conduct of research into COVID-19; services necessary for the operation, maintenance, or repair of goods for use in connection with the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19; collaboration on the development or enhancement of information related to COVID-19 to the extent not authorized or exempt; development of medical devices or medicines to counteract COVID-19; conduct of clinical studies in connection with COVID-19; provision of public education in connection with COVID-19; disposal of medical waste in connection with COVID-19; water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion materials and supplies, and shelter activities to prevent or treat COVID-19, including Risk Communication and Community Engagement efforts related to COVID-19, and other goods and services, directly related to prevention or treatment of COVID-19; provided all conditions and limitations in Venezuela GL 39 are satisfied.

Other transactions and activities related to the prevention, diagnosis, or treatment of COVID-19 in Venezuela include, for example, when in connection with COVID-19-related goods, technology, or services: &nbsp;processing and transfer of funds, payment of taxes, fees, and import duties; purchase or receipt of permits, licenses, or public utility services; making of shipping or cargo inspection arrangements; obtaining of insurance; arrangement of financing and payment; shipping of goods; delivery of services; receipt of payment; and entry into contracts (including executory contracts), provided all conditions and limitations in Venezuela GL 39 are satisfied.

As noted in Venezuela GL 39, this general license does not authorize the unblocking of any property blocked pursuant to any part of 31 CFR chapter V, including property of the Government of Venezuela or certain specified blocked financial institutions listed in Venezuela GL 39.&nbsp;[06-16-2021]

910.&nbsp;What are the due diligence expectations of U.S. financial institutions associated with processing fund transfers or trade finance transactions that are authorized by Iran General License (GL) N, Syria GL 21, and Venezuela GL 39?

U.S. financial institutions are authorized to process transfers of funds or engage in trade finance transactions ordinarily incident and necessary to give effect to the transactions and activities authorized by Iran GL N, Syria GL 21, and Venezuela GL 39.

Such financial institutions may rely on the originator of the funds transfer with regard to compliance with Iran GL N, Syria GL 21, and Venezuela GL 39, provided that the financial institution does not know or have reason to know that the funds transfer is not in compliance with such GLs. [06-16-2021]

911.&nbsp;Do non-U.S. persons risk exposure to U.S. sanctions for engaging in certain activities to respond to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic that U.S. persons would be authorized to engage in under Iran General License (GL) N, Syria GL 21, or Venezuela GL 39?

No. &nbsp;Non-U.S. persons do not risk exposure under U.S. sanctions for engaging in certain activities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic that would be authorized under Iran GL N, Syria GL 21, or Venezuela GL 39, as appropriate, if engaged in by a U.S. person. &nbsp;This includes non-U.S. exporters, nongovernmental organizations, international organizations, and foreign financial institutions, as well as other non-U.S. persons engaging in certain activities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.

For additional information on humanitarian activities by non-U.S. persons in relation to sanctioned jurisdictions, please see FAQs 844, 884, and 885. &nbsp;For information specific to the provision of humanitarian assistance to the Venezuelan people, please see OFAC’s August 6, 2019 Fact Sheet: Guidance Related to the Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Support to the Venezuelan People. &nbsp;For more information on other relevant exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations for humanitarian assistance and trade to combat COVID-19 under OFAC’s sanctions program, please see OFAC’s April 16, 2020 Fact Sheet: Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Trade to Combat COVID-19. &nbsp;[06-16-2021]





OFAC Licenses


General Questions Regarding OFAC Licenses and Licensing Procedures
74. What is a license?


A license is an authorization from OFAC to engage in a transaction that otherwise would be prohibited. There are two types of licenses: general licenses and specific licenses.

A general license authorizes a particular type of transaction for a class of persons without the need to apply for a license.

A specific license is a written document issued by OFAC to a particular person or entity, authorizing a particular transaction in response to a written license application.

Persons engaging in transactions pursuant to general or specific licenses must make sure that all conditions of the licenses are strictly observed.

OFAC's regulations may contain statements of OFAC's specific licensing policy with respect to particular types of transactions. [06-16-06]



75. Do I have to fill out a particular form to get a license to engage in a transaction?

Most license applications do not have to be submitted on a particular form. However, it is essential to include in the request all necessary information as required in the application guidelines or the regulations pertaining to the particular embargo program. When applying for a license, provide a detailed description of the proposed transaction, including the names and addresses of any individuals/companies involved. The mailing address for license applications is:

Office of Foreign Assets Control
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Treasury Annex
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220
Attn: Licensing Division

In order to apply for a specific license to release blocked funds, you are encouraged to file an electronic application to have blocked funds released by visiting the following link: https://licensing.ofac.treas.gov/Apply/Introduction.aspx

You may also submit an application for the release of blocked funds which is available on OFAC's website under &quot;Forms.&quot; You should print this form, complete the required information, attach payment instructions, and mail it to the address listed above.

Depending upon the transaction, there may be specific guidance available on OFAC's website under relevant &quot;Guidance on Licensing policy&quot; on OFAC's various sanctions program web pages. [10-08-13]



76. Can I appeal a denial of my license application?

A denial by OFAC of a license application constitutes final agency action. The regulations do not provide for a formal process of appeal. However, OFAC will reconsider its determinations for good cause, for example, where the applicant can demonstrate changed circumstances or submit additional relevant information not previously made available to OFAC. [09-10-02]



77. How can I find out the status of my pending license application?

OFAC will notify applicants in writing as soon as a determination has been made on their application. The length of time for determinations to be reached will vary depending on the complexity of the transactions under consideration, the scope and detail of interagency coordination, and the volume of similar applications awaiting consideration. Applicants are encouraged to wait at least two weeks before telephonically contacting the Licensing Division at (202) 622-2480 to inquire about the status of their application. Callers can use OFAC's automated license application status hotline (accessible through the 202-622-2480 number) to check on the status of their application. [10-08-13]



78. What agencies other than Treasury review OFAC license applications and what are the roles of these other agencies?

Many of OFAC's licensing determinations are guided by U.S. foreign policy and national security concerns. Numerous issues often must be coordinated with the U.S. Department of State and other government agencies, such as the U.S. Department of Commerce. Please note that the need to comply with other provisions of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, and with other applicable provisions of law, including any aviation, financial, or trade requirements of agencies other than the Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control. Such requirements include the Export Administration Regulations, 15 C.F.R. Parts 730 et seq., administered by the Department of Commerce, and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations, 22 C.F.R. Parts 120-130, administered by the Department of State. [06-16-06]



51. How do I apply for a license to get my money unblocked?

With respect to blocked funds transfers, you are encouraged to file an electronic application to have blocked funds released by visiting the following link: https://licensing.ofac.treas.gov/Apply/Introduction.aspx

You may also submit an application for the release of blocked funds which is available on OFAC's website under &quot;Forms.&quot; You should print this form, complete the required information, attach payment instructions, and mail it to:

Office of Foreign Assets Control
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Treasury Annex
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20220
Attn: Licensing Division

It is extremely important that the underlying transaction be described in detail and copies of supporting documentation be included in the package. [10-08-13]



58. What are the chances that my application will be approved?

Each application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis and often requires interagency consultation. Although we cannot predict how long this review might take, following existing application guidelines will help to expedite your determination. [09-10-02]



59. Do I need a registration number or license to donate goods?

Most OFAC sanctions programs provide exemptions to their prohibitions for certain donated goods, such as articles to relieve human suffering. This is not the case for all programs, however. You should refer to the legal section of OFAC's website for the regulations applicable to the specific target or target country of your donation. [09-10-02]




Questions Regarding Licenses Authorizing Exports of Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices to Iran Pursuant to the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (TSRA)
97. What format options are permitted for submitting license applications pursuant to the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (TSRA)?


OFAC permits two format options for submitting TSRA license applications: online or hard-copy, though we highly recommend the use of OFAC’s online application portal. &nbsp;Applications submitted via mail must be accompanied by a cover letter that includes some essential information: &nbsp;the purpose of the application and the applicant’s full contact information. &nbsp;If either the cover letter or the pertinent information is missing, the application is considered incomplete and risks delay or rejection. [04-12-2021]



98. How should I present my TSRA license application?

Applicants should clearly enumerate in a table format all pertinent information related to their proposed transactions, including: a) Full names and addresses of all parties involved in the transactions and their roles, including financial institutions and any Iranian broker (identify company principals), purchasing agent (identify company principals), end-user(s) (full contact name), or other participants involved in the purchase of the proposed export items; and b) If applicable, the commodity classification numbers that are associated with the proposed export items. [04-12-2021]



100. If I am submitting multiple TSRA license applications at the same time, should I send them under a single cover letter?

OFAC requires applicants to submit each individual application separately; regardless of if you are completing the online application or sending in a hard copy application through the mail. If an applicant is submitting a hard copy, each application should be in a separate envelope, accompanied by a separate cover letter. Applicants should not submit multiple applications in a single envelope with a single cover letter. If you submit applications in that manner, you may encounter some delay in the processing of your applications. Therefore, in order to prevent such delay, submit one application with one cover letter per envelope. [03-16-2015]



101. Should I send a sample of the proposed export product as an attachment to my TSRA license application?

No. OFAC does not require samples of proposed export products to be sent as attachments to any application. OFAC does not need to examine samples of the actual product in making its final determination. Therefore, please do not include any samples with your application. [06-14-2007]



Specific to Iran

117. I hold a specific license to sell agricultural goods, medicine, or medical devices to Iran. The general license at section 560.532(a)(4) of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) authorizes me to accept a letter of credit issued by an Iranian financial institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to the ITSR (i.e., an Iranian financial institution that is not listed on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List)). The general license, however, also states that a U.S. financial institution may not advise, confirm, or otherwise deal in that credit. How am I supposed to know if/when a letter of credit has been issued for my sale and how do I get paid? My bank accounts are all at U.S. financial institutions.

This language is in the general license at section 560.532(a)(4) of the ITSR because it is contrary to U.S. foreign policy to allow U.S. financial institutions to maintain active correspondent relationships with Iranian banks. The language, however, does not preclude a U.S. financial institution or an entity owned or controlled by a United States Person and established or maintained outside the United States ( U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity ) from being a second advising bank (i.e. receiving and passing forward advice from a third-country bank that the credit has been issued), nor does it preclude the U.S. financial institution or a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity from receiving funds in payment for the licensed export from a third-country bank. You should also note that the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations authorize U.S. financial institutions and U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities to directly advise or confirm letters of credit issued by third-country banks for authorized shipments. The third-country bank may not be an overseas branch of a U.S. financial institution, a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity, an Iranian financial institution, or the Government of Iran, unless otherwise authorized by OFAC. In none of these circumstances, however, may there be any direct or indirect involvement of entities the property and interests in property of which have been blocked under any of the programs administered by OFAC, except for persons whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599 and the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations. [01-13-2017]



Specific to Sudan

500. I am an exporter of agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices to Sudan and have previously obtained specific licenses from OFAC for such exports. &nbsp;Do I still need to apply for a specific license from OFAC for exports or reexports of such items to Sudan?

No. &nbsp;As of December 14, 2020, no license from OFAC is required to export or reexport agricultural commodities, medicines, or medical devices to Sudan. [04-12-2021]





&nbsp;


How to Receive Notifications About OFAC Updates


86. Does OFAC have an email service that will notify me when there are updates to any of its sanctions lists?

Yes. OFAC has multiple e-mail subscription services available. Please visit the following link to sign up for these services:

https://service.govdelivery.com/service/multi_subscribe.html?code=USTREAS

OFAC also maintains a Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feed. This feed is updated whenever the OFAC site is updated. [11-18-10]



92. I'm a subscriber to OFAC's e-mail notification services. For some reason I have stopped receiving the broadcast messages when OFAC updates its website. Why is this?

Check to see if the messages are in your SPAM folder. Mostly likely, it is your SPAM filter or your network configuration that is preventing you from receiving the OFAC broadcast messages. If you believe that may be the case, please discuss the matter with your IT department or network administrator. You may need to have your IT personnel allow e-mails from the following domain to come through the SPAM filter, &quot;subscriptions.treas.gov;&quot; in some cases allowing the domain,  treas.gov through the filter will also work. If you believe that you have been removed from the subscription list in error you may contact OFAC at O_F_A_C@do.treas.gov or re subscribe here. [04-21-15]



93. I recently attempted to subscribe to one of OFAC s e-mail list services and I have not yet received my confirmation e-mail. Why is this?

Failure to receive a confirmation e-mail is typically (though not always) the result of a configuration problem on the user s end. The user should follow these steps to ensure that he or she is using the system properly.

Be patient. For a variety of reasons e-mail sometimes take a little longer than expected to reach a user. If you do not receive a confirmation e-mail within a day of subscribing, proceed to step 2.
	Confirm that you have entered the correct e-mail address and address punctuation. A surprising number of errors have been the result of users accidentally using commas instead of periods.
	Check to see if you have a SPAM filter in place. SPAM filters have a variety of configurations. Some of these filters have been known to erroneously block e-mails originating from OFAC s list servers. OFAC cannot provide technical support for local configuration issues. If you believe a SPAM filter is preventing you from receiving OFAC e-mails, please discuss the matter with your IT department or network administrator. You will need to have your IT personnel allow e-mails from the following domain to come through the SPAM filter &quot;subscriptions.treas.gov&quot;. Once this is done you may proceed to step 4. If you can confirm that you do not have a SPAM filter in place or any other local configuration problem, please skip step 4 and proceed to step 5.
	If your network or e-mail client s configuration is preventing you from receiving your subscription confirmation e-mail, it is likely that you will not be able to receive e-mail from OFAC s list servers even if OFAC manually adds you to our listserv. These configuration issues must be resolved with your IT department or network administrator before you can proceed.
	If, after you have exhausted all of the above options, you still fail to receive OFAC s broadcast notifications, please call our support hotline at 1-800-540-6322. [12-19-07]




&nbsp;


OFAC Information on a Credit Report


70. What Is This OFAC Information On My Credit Report?

Credit bureaus and agencies in particular have adopted new measures to ensure compliance with OFAC regulations. Before issuing a credit report, they use screening software to determine if a credit applicant is on OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list or one of OFAC's other sanctions lists. This software matches the credit applicant's name and other information to the names on OFAC's sanctions lists. If there is a potential match, the credit bureaus may place a &quot;red flag&quot; or alert on the report. This does not necessarily mean that someone is illegally using your social security number or that you have bad credit. It is merely a reminder to the person checking your credit that he or she should verify whether you are the individual on one of OFAC's sanctions lists by comparing your information to the OFAC information. If you are not the individual on the sanctions list, the person checking your credit should disregard the OFAC alert, and there is no need to contact OFAC. However, if the person checking your credit believes you are the person on one of OFAC's sanctions lists, then he or she should call the OFAC Hotline to verify and report it. [01-30-15]



71. How Can I Get The OFAC Alert Off My Credit Report?

A consumer has the right under the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq., to request the removal of incorrect information on his/her credit report. To accomplish this, consumers should contact the credit reporting agency or bureau that issued the credit report. For more information on consumers' rights under the FCRA, visit the Federal Trade Commission's website at http://www.ftc.gov/os/statutes/fcrajump.shtm or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau at 855-411-2372. [01-30-2015]




&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Entities Owned by Persons Whose Property and Interest in Property are Blocked (50% Rule)

These Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) respond to inquiries received by the Department of the Treasury s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) relating to the status of entities owned by individuals or entities whose property and interests in property are blocked under Executive orders and regulations administered by OFAC (blocked persons). These FAQs provide additional clarity regarding revised guidance that OFAC issued on August 13, 2014, which can be found on OFAC s website here, amending earlier guidance that had been issued on February 14, 2008 (OFAC s 50 Percent Rule). The revised guidance states that the property and interests in property of entities directly or indirectly owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons are considered blocked regardless of whether such entities appear on OFAC s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List) or the annex to an Executive order. The revised guidance expands upon the earlier guidance by addressing entities owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by more than one blocked person.*

For the purposes of clarification, see specific FAQs below. If you require additional guidance with respect to the application of OFAC s 50 Percent Rule, you may contact OFAC and submit information pertaining to the specific facts and circumstances. [10-31-2017]

*OFAC also applies a 50 percent rule to entities on the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List (SSI List) created in July 2014 in the Ukraine-/Russia-related sanctions context. The property and interests in property of persons on the SSI List (and entities owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more persons subject to the SSI List restrictions) are not required to be blocked; instead a more limited set of transaction restrictions applies to them. In the context of the SSI List restrictions, therefore, these FAQs can be used to identify which subordinate entities are subject to the SSI List restrictions only and are not meant to suggest that any additional actions (such as blocking) apply to those entities.&nbsp; The references to  33 percent or greater ownership and  ownership of a majority of the voting interests in Directive 4, as amended on October 31, 2017, do not change the applicability of OFAC s 50 percent rule in the Directive 4 context.&nbsp; For additional information, see FAQs 373,&nbsp;537,&nbsp;and 538.&nbsp;


398.&nbsp;Does OFAC consider entities over which one or more blocked persons exercise control, but of which they do not own 50 percent or more in the aggregate, to be blocked pursuant to OFAC s 50 Percent Rule?

No.&nbsp; OFAC s 50 Percent Rule  speaks only to ownership and not to control.&nbsp; An entity that is controlled (but not owned 50 percent or more) by one or more blocked persons is not considered automatically blocked pursuant to OFAC s 50 Percent Rule.&nbsp; OFAC may, however, designate the entity under an available sanctions criteria or otherwise identify the entity as blocked property if determined to be controlled by one or more designated persons and add the entity to OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List).&nbsp;

OFAC urges caution when considering a transaction with an entity that is not a blocked person (a non-blocked entity) in which one or more blocked persons have a significant ownership interest that is less than 50 percent or which one or more blocked persons may control by means other than a majority ownership interest.&nbsp; Such non-blocked entities may become the subject of future designations or enforcement actions by OFAC.&nbsp; In addition, persons should be cautious in dealing with such a non-blocked entity to ensure that they are not, for example, dealing with a blocked person representing the non-blocked entity, such as entering into a contract that is signed by a blocked person.&nbsp; Please also note that some sanctions programs (e.g., the Crimea region of Ukraine, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Syria, and Venezuela) block certain persons without an OFAC designation; these blockings are based on criteria separate from OFAC s 50 Percent Rule, such as the blocking of persons that meet the definition of a blocked government. [08-11-2020]



399. Does OFAC aggregate ownership stakes of all blocked persons when determining whether an entity is blocked pursuant to OFAC s 50 Percent Rule?

Yes. On August 13, 2014, OFAC indicated in its revised 50 Percent Rule guidance that OFAC's 50 Percent Rule applies to entities owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons. Accordingly, if Blocked Person X owns 25 percent of Entity A, and Blocked Person Y owns another 25 percent of Entity A, Entity A is considered to be blocked. This is so because Entity A is owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons. For the purpose of calculating aggregate ownership, the ownership interests of persons blocked under different OFAC sanctions programs are aggregated. [08-13-2014]



400. As explained in FAQ 398, OFAC s 50 Percent Rule does not apply if one or more individuals who are blocked persons (blocked individuals) control, but do not own 50 percent or more of, an entity. Can persons engage in negotiations, enter into contracts, or process transactions involving a blocked individual when that blocked individual is acting on behalf of the non-blocked entity that he or she controls (e.g., a blocked individual is an executive of a non-blocked entity and is signing a contract on behalf of the non-blocked entity)?

No. OFAC sanctions generally prohibit transactions involving, directly or indirectly, a blocked person, absent authorization from OFAC, even if the blocked person is acting on behalf of a non-blocked entity. Therefore, U.S. persons should be careful when conducting business with non-blocked entities in which blocked individuals are involved; U.S. persons may not, for example, enter into contracts that are signed by a blocked individual. [08-13-2014]



401. OFAC s 50 Percent Rule states that the property and interests in property of entities directly or indirectly owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons are considered blocked. How does OFAC interpret indirect ownership as it relates to certain complex ownership structures?

&quot;Indirectly,&quot; as used in OFAC s 50 Percent Rule, refers to one or more blocked persons' ownership of shares of an entity through another entity or entities that are 50 percent or more owned in the aggregate by the blocked person(s). OFAC urges persons considering a potential transaction to conduct appropriate due diligence on entities that are party to or involved with the transaction or with which account relationships are maintained in order to determine relevant ownership stakes. Please see FAQ 116 for additional guidance on due diligence standards for intermediary parties to wire transfers. Please refer to the examples below for further guidance on determining whether an entity is blocked pursuant to OFAC's 50 Percent Rule.

Example 1: Blocked Person X owns 50 percent of Entity A, and Entity A owns 50 percent of Entity B. Entity B is considered to be blocked. This is so because Blocked Person X owns, indirectly, 50% of Entity B. In addition, Blocked Person X's 50 percent ownership of Entity A makes Entity A a blocked person. Entity A's 50 percent ownership of Entity B in turn makes Entity B a blocked person.

Example 2: Blocked Person X owns 50 percent of Entity A and 50 percent of Entity B. Entities A and B each own 25 percent of Entity C. Entity C is considered to be blocked. This is so because, through its 50 percent ownership of Entity A, Blocked Person X is considered to indirectly own 25 percent of Entity C; and through its 50 percent ownership of Entity B, Blocked Person X is considered to indirectly own another 25 percent of Entity C. When Blocked Person X's indirect ownership of Entity C through Entity A and Entity B is totaled, it equals 50 percent. Entity C is also considered to be blocked due to the 50 percent aggregate ownership by Entities A and B, which are themselves blocked entities due to Blocked Person X's 50 percent ownership of each.

Example 3: Blocked Person X owns 50 percent of Entity A and 10 percent of Entity B. Entity A also owns 40 percent of Entity B. Entity B is considered to be blocked. This is so because, through its 50 percent ownership of Entity A, Blocked Person X is considered to indirectly own 40 percent of Entity B. When added to Blocked Person X's direct 10 percent ownership of Entity B, Blocked Person X's total ownership (direct and indirect) of Entity B is 50 percent. Entity B is also blocked due to the 50 percent aggregate ownership by Blocked Person X and Entity A, which are themselves both blocked persons.

Example 4: Blocked Person X owns 50 percent of Entity A and 25 percent of Entity B. Entities A and B each own 25 percent of Entity C. Entity C is not considered to be blocked. This is so because, even though Blocked Person X is considered to indirectly own 25 percent of Entity C through its 50 percent ownership of Entity A, Entity B is not 50 percent or more owned by Blocked Person X, and therefore Blocked Person X is not considered to indirectly own any of Entity C through its part ownership of Entity B. Blocked Person X's total ownership (direct and indirect) of Entity C therefore does not equal or exceed 50 percent. Entity A is itself a blocked person, but its ownership of Entity C also does not equal or exceed 50 percent.

Example 5: Blocked Person X owns 25 percent of Entity A and 25 percent of Entity B. Entities A and B each own 50 percent of Entity C. Entity C is not considered to be blocked. This is so because Blocked Person X's 25 percent ownership of each of Entity A and Entity B falls short of 50 percent. Accordingly, neither Entity A nor Entity B is blocked and Blocked Person X is not considered to indirectly own any of Entity C through its part ownership of Entities A or B. [08-13-2014]



402. How does OFAC s 50 Percent Rule apply to situations in which one or more blocked persons owned 50 percent or more of an entity, but subsequent to their designations one or more blocked persons divest their ownership stakes in the entity in a transaction that occurs entirely outside of U.S. jurisdiction such that the resulting combined ownership of the entity by blocked persons is less than 50 percent? How should a person treat property or interests in property of such an entity (1) in future transactions (post-divestment) and (2) that was properly blocked while the entity was owned 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons?

According to OFAC's 50 Percent Rule, entities are considered blocked if they are owned 50 percent or more (directly or indirectly) in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons. If one or more blocked persons divest their ownership stake such that the resulting combined ownership by blocked persons is less than 50 percent, the entity is no longer considered automatically to be a blocked entity. Any such divestment transactions must occur entirely outside of U.S. jurisdiction and must not involve U.S. persons, as any blocked property or interests in property that come into the possession or control of a U.S. person must be blocked and reported to OFAC, and OFAC does not recognize any subsequent unlicensed transfers, through changes in ownership or otherwise, of such property.

Entities in which the aggregate of one or more blocked persons' ownership stakes has fallen below 50 percent are not considered blocked pursuant to OFAC's 50 Percent Rule, and therefore property of such entities that comes into the United States or the possession or control of a U.S. person while the aggregate of one or more blocked persons' ownership stakes is below 50 percent is not considered blocked by OFAC's 50 Percent Rule. OFAC urges caution when dealing with or processing transactions involving such entities, as those entities may become the subject of future designations or enforcement actions by OFAC. Sufficient due diligence should be conducted to determine that any purported divestment in fact occurred and that the transfer of ownership interests was not merely a sham transaction.

When the property of an entity owned 50 percent or more by a single blocked person comes within the United States or within the possession or control of a U.S. person and is blocked, the property remains blocked unless and until (1) OFAC authorizes the unblocking of or other dealings in the property or (2) OFAC removes the blocked person from the SDN List. The property remains blocked even if the blocked person's ownership of the entity subsequently falls below 50 percent. This is so because the blocked person is considered to have an interest in the blocked property, and OFAC does not recognize the unlicensed transfer of the blocked person s interest after the property becomes blocked in the United States or in the possession or control of a U.S. person. Persons holding such property may request authorization from OFAC's Licensing Division to transfer or otherwise deal in that property (the electronic application can be found on OFAC's website here), and OFAC will evaluate such requests on a case-by-case basis.

Similarly, when the property of an entity owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by more than one blocked person comes within the United States or in the possession or control of a U.S. person and is blocked, the property remains blocked unless and until (1) OFAC authorizes the unblocking of or other dealings in the property or (2) OFAC removes from the SDN List one or more of the blocked persons such that the aggregate ownership by blocked persons falls below 50 percent. If the aggregate ownership of the entity by blocked persons falls below 50 percent not due to SDN List removal actions by OFAC but instead due to actions by one or more of the blocked persons, including the entity itself, the property remains blocked. This is so because the group of blocked persons is considered to have an interest in the blocked property, and OFAC does not recognize the unlicensed transfer of any of the blocked persons' interests after the property becomes blocked in the United States or in the possession or control of a U.S. person. Persons holding such property may request authorization from OFAC's Licensing Division to transfer or otherwise deal in that property (the electronic application can be found on OFAC s website here), and OFAC will evaluate such requests on a case-by-case basis. [08-13-2014]




&nbsp;


Cross-Programmatic Compliance Services Guidance


495. Why did OFAC issue the Guidance on the Provision of Certain Services Relating to the Requirements of U.S. Sanctions Laws (the  Compliance Services Guidance )?

OFAC has received numerous inquiries, many from foreign companies at outreach events, regarding whether U.S. persons may provide, and whether U.S. persons have been able to provide in the past, certain types of legal and compliance services to covered persons. The Compliance Services Guidance provides clarity in response to those inquiries. For purposes of the Compliance Services Guidance,  covered persons means U.S. persons and foreign persons other than any person (i) whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, including persons listed on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List), or (ii) to whom a U.S. person is prohibited from exporting services or from whom a U.S. person is prohibited from importing services pursuant to any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V. The Compliance Services Guidance does not describe every allowable service relating to the requirements of U.S. sanctions laws. [01-12-2017]



496. Does the Compliance Services Guidance represent a change in OFAC s policy with respect to the provision of legal and compliance services?

No. The Compliance Services Guidance does not reflect a change in OFAC s policy with respect to the provision of these types of legal and compliance services. OFAC is issuing the Compliance Services Guidance in response to numerous inquiries to ensure that both U.S. and foreign individuals and entities understand that U.S. persons may provide services consistent with the Compliance Services Guidance. [01-12-2017]



497. In providing services consistent with the Compliance Services Guidance to a foreign covered person, can a U.S. person opine on the legality of a transaction under U.S. sanctions laws, including by providing a legal opinion, certification, or other clearance as to the legality of such transaction, where it would be prohibited for a U.S. person to engage in such transaction?

Yes. In providing services to a foreign covered person, a U.S. person may opine on the legality of a transaction under U.S. sanctions laws, including by providing a legal opinion, certification, or other clearance as to the legality of such transaction, where it would be prohibited for a U.S. person to engage in the transaction. U.S. persons may not provide such services to persons who are subject to certain restrictions under OFAC s regulations, such as persons listed on OFAC s SDN List.

U.S. persons, wherever located, may not otherwise approve, finance, facilitate, or guarantee any transaction by a foreign person, including one that meets the definition of a covered person, as defined in FAQ #495, where the transaction by that foreign person would be prohibited by 31 C.F.R. chapter V if performed by a U.S. person or within the United States. For example, U.S. persons could not vote on a transaction (e.g., as a board member), or execute transaction documents (other than as to the legality of the transaction, as specified above), where the transaction would be prohibited if performed by a U.S. person or within the United States. [01-12-2017]



498. The Compliance Services Guidance states that a U.S. person may solicit information from covered persons and conduct research to make a determination as to the legality of transactions under U.S. sanctions laws. What are examples of research that would be allowable under the Compliance Services Guidance?

U.S. persons may conduct research using the internet, including searches of commercial databases, as well as published reference materials for the purpose of determining the legality of transactions under U.S. sanctions laws. In addition, U.S. persons may solicit information regarding a transaction from covered persons, such as, for example, the currency involved; any involvement of U.S. persons, directly or indirectly; and the identity of the covered person s counterparty. [01-12-2017]



499. What type of research exceeds the scope of the Compliance Services Guidance?

A U.S. person may not conduct research that otherwise involves the importation or exportation of services where such transactions are prohibited by any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, unless such transactions are authorized by OFAC. [01-12-2017]








Burma Sanctions


481. If there is an active and ongoing investigation against an individual or entity for apparent violations of the Burmese Sanctions Regulations ( BSR ), would that investigation cease now that the President has ended economic and financial sanctions on Burma and the prohibitions in the BSR are no longer in effect?

Pending OFAC enforcement matters will proceed irrespective of the termination of OFAC-administered sanctions on Burma, and OFAC will continue to review app arent violations of the BSR, whether they came to the agency s attention before or after the Burma sanctions program was terminated. Under longstanding practice, apparent sanctions violations are analyzed in light of the laws and regulations that were in place at the time of the underlying activities, and civil and criminal enforcement authorities are applied accordingly. Current or future investigations regarding apparent violations of the BSR will not be impacted by its termination and may result in OFAC enforcement actions after the termination of the BSR. [10-07-2016]



882. For purposes of Burma General License (GL) 2, what organizations are included within the United Nations' &quot;Programmes, Funds, and Other Entities and Bodies, as well as its Specialized Agencies and Related Organizations?&quot; 

For an organizational chart of the United Nations, which lists the Programmes, Funds, and Other Entities and Bodies, as well as the Specialized Agencies and Related Organizations covered by this GL, see the following page on the United Nations website: https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/un_system_chart.pdf. [03-25-2021]



883. What does Burma General License 4 authorize? 

Burma General License (GL) 4 authorizes, subject to certain conditions, all transactions and activities prohibited by Executive Order (E.O.) 14014, that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of transactions involving, directly or indirectly, Myanmar Economic Corporation Limited (MEC) or Myanma Economic Holdings Public Company Limited (MEHL), or any entity in which MEC or MEHL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, through 12:01 a.m., eastern daylight time, June 22, 2021. Persons unable to wind down transactions prohibited by E.O. 14014 in which such blocked persons have an interest before that time are encouraged to seek formal guidance from OFAC. For the duration of GL 4, non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions involving, directly or indirectly, MEC or MEHL, or any entity in which MEC or MEHL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 14014, provided that such wind down activity is consistent with GL 4. While GL 4 is in effect, wind down transactions may be processed through the U.S. financial system or involve U.S. persons, as long as the transactions comply with the terms and conditions in GL 4. [03-25-2021]



&nbsp;


Cuba Sanctions


693. What did the September 9, 2019 amendment to the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) do?

Effective&nbsp;October 9, 2019 an amendment to the CACR revises certain authorizations for remittances to Cuba to impose new requirements and limitations, eliminates the authorization for donative remittances, and revises the authorization commonly known as the  U-turn general license.

The September 9, 2019 amendment revises the  U-turn general license located at 31 CFR § 515.584(d) to eliminate the authorization for banking institutions subject to U.S. jurisdiction to process  U-turn transactions; i.e., funds transfers that originate and terminate outside the United States where neither the originator nor beneficiary is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction. The amended  U-turn general license authorizes banking institutions that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to reject and not require them to block such transactions. For more on changes to the  U-turn general license, please see FAQ 757.
	With respect to remittances, the September 9, 2019 rule amends the general license authorizing family remittances to (1) place a cap of $1,000 as the maximum amount that one remitter can send to one Cuban national as a family remittance per quarter, and (2) exclude close relatives of prohibited officials of the Government of Cuba or close relatives of prohibited members of the Cuban Communist Party as authorized recipients of family remittances. (The prohibited officials themselves were already barred from being recipients of such remittances. See 31 CFR § 515.570(a), as well as 31 CFR § 515.339 for the definition of  close relatives .) The September 9, 2019 rule also amends the general license authorizing remittances to certain individuals and independent non-governmental organizations in Cuba to now authorize remittances to certain additional  self-employed individuals (See 31 CFR § 515.570(g), as well as 31 CFR § 515.340, for the new definition of  self-employed individuals ). Effective October 9, 2019, OFAC eliminated the general license for donative remittances that was previously located at 31 CFR § 515.570(b). For more on changes to remittances, please see FAQ 732. [09-06-2019]



694. What did the June 5, 2019 amendments to CACR do?

Previously, on June 5, 2019, an amendment to the CACR removed an authorization for people-to-people educational travel that was conducted under the auspices of an organization that is subject to U.S. jurisdiction and that sponsors such exchanges to promote people-to-people contact (group people-to-people educational travel). The amendment includes a grandfather clause, however, that authorizes certain group people-to-people educational travel that previously was authorized, so long as the traveler had already completed at least one travel-related transaction (su ch as purchasing a flight or reserving accommodation) prior to June 5, 2019.

On June 16, 2017, the President issued National Security Presidential Memorandum-5 on Strengthening the Policy of the United States Toward Cuba (the NSPM). On November 9, 2017, OFAC amended the CACR to implement the NSPM. On April 17, 2019, the Administration announced regulatory changes to further implement the NSPM and the President s foreign policy toward Cuba, including that the Department of the Treasury would further restrict non-family travel. The regulatory actions taken on June 5, 2019 and September 9, 2019 implement the President s foreign policy toward Cuba as announced on April 17, 2019.

Please note that the Cuba embargo remains in place, and most transactions between the United States, or persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, and Cuba continue to be prohibited. OFAC continues to enforce the prohibitions of the CACR.

The Department of Commerce s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), in coordination with OFAC s June 5, 2019 amendment, amended its Export Administration Regulations (EAR) (15 CFR Parts 730-774). For additional information, see BIS s Cuba webpage. [09-06-2019]


Travel


695. What are the general travel authorizations in the Cuba program?

Travel-related transactions are permitted by general or specific licenses for certain travel related to the 12 categories of activities identified in § 515.560(a). &nbsp;Those travel-related transactions permitted by general license, subject to specified criteria and conditions, include: family visits; official business of the U.S. government, foreign governments, and certain intergovernmental organizations; journalistic activity; professional research; educational activities; religious activities; athletic competitions by amateur or semi-professional athletes or athletic teams; support for the Cuban people; humanitarian projects; activities of private foundations or research or educational institutes; exportation, importation, or transmission of information or information materials; and certain authorized export transactions. Each person relying on a certain general authorization must retain specific records related to the authorized travel transactions. See §§ 501.601 and 501.602 of Reporting, Procedures and Penalties Regulations for applicable recordkeeping and reporting requirements.

In accordance with NSPM-5, on November 9, 2017, OFAC added a prohibition to restrict certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. In order to implement this prohibition, OFAC made a conforming change to § 515.421 and added corresponding language in the following general licenses: §§ 515.530, 515.534, 515.545, 515.560, 515.561, 515.564, 515.565,
515.566, 515.567, 515.572, 515.573, 515.574, 515.576, 515.577, 515.578, 515.581, 515.584, and
515.590. OFAC has not incorporated this prohibition into certain general licenses in accordance with the exceptions detailed in section 3(a)(iii) of NSPM-5. &nbsp;

Also, on September 24, 2020, OFAC added a prohibition at § 515.210 of the CACR, which prohibits any person subject to U.S. jurisdiction from lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property that the Secretary of State has identified as a property in Cuba that is owned or controlled by the Cuban government; a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, as defined in § 515.337; a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, as defined in § 515.338; a close relative, as defined in § 515.339, of a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, or a close relative of a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, when the terms of the general or specific license expressly exclude such a transaction. In furtherance of this change, the State Department is creating a new list, the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List, to publish the names, addresses, or other identifying details, as relevant, of properties identified as meeting such criteria. In order to implement this prohibition, OFAC made a conforming change to § 515.421 and added corresponding language in the following general licenses: &nbsp;§§ 515.533, 515.545, 515.559, 515.560, 515.561, 515.563, 515.564, 515.565, 515.566, 515.567, 515.572, 515.574, 515.575, and 515.576. [09-23-2020]
&nbsp;



696. Are authorized travelers who have initiated travel arrangements prior to the addition of an entity or subentity on the State Department's Cuba Restricted List required to cancel their Cuba-related travel plans if their travel arrangements involve direct financial transactions with a listed entity or subentity?

Consistent with the Administration's interest in avoiding negative impacts on Americans for arranging lawful travel to Cuba, any travel-related arrangements that include direct financial transactions with entities and subentities that appear on the State Department's Cuba Restricted List will continue to be permitted, provided that those travel arrangements were initiated prior to the State Department's addition of the entity or subentity to the list. Once the State Department adds an entity or subentity to the Cuba Restricted List, new direct financial transactions with the entity or subentity are prohibited, unless authorized by OFAC or exempt. For a complete description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. [09-06-2019]



697. Do travelers who fall within the scope of a general license need to submit a written request to OFAC for permission to travel or conduct transactions?

No. No further permission from OFAC is required to engage in transactions by a person who meets all criteria in a general license. Individuals wishing to engage in activities that may fall within the scope of a general license should review the relevant general licenses contained in the CACR to determine whether their travel-related transactions are covered by such general licenses. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who wish to engage in any travel within the 12 categories of activities specified in the CACR that does not meet the requirements of a general license will need to apply for a specific license from OFAC. [11-08-2017]



698. Is travel to Cuba for tourist activities permitted?

No. Consistent with the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (TSRA), travel-related transactions involving Cuba are only permitted for the 12 categories of activities identified in the CACR. Travel-related transactions for other purposes remain prohibited. [11-08-2017]



699. What constitutes &quot;a close relative&quot;&nbsp;for generally authorized family travel?

OFAC regulations generally authorize persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction and those sharing a dwelling with them as a family to visit a close relative in Cuba, including a close relative who is a Cuban national or a person ordinarily resident in Cuba, or to visit or accompany a close relative who is located in or traveling to Cuba pursuant to the authorizations in § 515.562 (official government business), § 515.563 (journalistic activity), § 515.564(a) (professional research), § 515.565(a)(1)(i) through (iv) and (vi) (educational activities), § 515.566 (religious activities), § 515.575 (humanitarian projects), or § 515.576 (activities of private foundations or research or educational institutes). A close relative is defined as any individual related to a person “by blood, marriage, or adoption who is no more than three generations removed from that person or from a common ancestor with that person.” For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.339 and § 515.561. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended the general license in § 515.561 to exclude direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List from the authorizations. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. [09-06-2019]



700. Who is generally authorized to engage in travel and travel-related transactions for “journalistic activity”?

Section 515.563 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel- related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to journalistic activities in Cuba. Among other things, this general license authorizes, subject to conditions, full-time journalists, supporting broadcast or technical personnel, and freelance journalists to travel to Cuba. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full- time schedule. An entire group does not qualify for the general license merely because some members of the group qualify individually. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.563. [09-23-2020]


701. What constitutes generally authorized travel-related transactions for “professional research” in Cuba?
Section 515.564(a) of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to professional research in Cuba. Among other things, this general license authorizes, subject to conditions, professional research in Cuba relating to a traveler’s profession, professional background, or area of expertise, including area of graduate-level full-time study. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List from its authorization. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule of professional research. An entire group does not qualify for the general license merely because some members of the group qualify individually. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.564.&nbsp;

On September 24, 2020, OFAC eliminated the general license previously contained in §515.564(a)(2) for travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to attendance at, or organization of, professional meetings or conferences in Cuba. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are no longer generally authorized to attend or organize professional meetings or conferences in Cuba pursuant to this section. OFAC amended § 515.564 to clarify that specific licenses may be issued on a case-by-case basis authorizing the travel-related transactions in § 515.560(c) and other transactions that are related to professional research in Cuba that do not qualify for the general license under 515.564(a) or professional meetings or conferences in Cuba that are not authorized under other travel-related authorizations and that relate to activities otherwise authorized pursuant to the CACR. [09-23-20]



702. What constitutes “educational activities” for generally authorized travel and other transactions?

OFAC amended the general license for educational activities in accordance with NSPM-5 process to authorize travel that was permitted by regulation on January 27, 2011. In addition, OFAC added requirements for certain categories of authorized educational travel that were not permitted by regulation on January 27, 2011 to require that all such travel be conducted under the auspices of an organization that is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction. In addition, travelers utilizing this authorization must be accompanied by a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction who is a representative of the sponsoring organization. In certain cases where the traveler is an employee, paid consultant, agent, or other representative traveling individually (not as part of a group), the individual may obtain a certification letter from the sponsoring organization. For a complete description of what such a letter must include and which categories of educational travelers may utilize this authorization, see 31 CFR § 515.565(a)(2).

Among other things, this general license authorizes, subject to conditions, faculty, staff, and students at U.S. academic institutions and secondary schools to engage in certain educational activities, including study abroad programs, in Cuba, Cuban scholars to engage in certain educational activities in the United States, and certain activities to facilitate licensed educational programs. U.S. and Cuban universities may engage in academic exchanges and joint non-commercial academic research under the general license. This provision also authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide standardized testing services and certain internet-based courses to Cuban nationals. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.565.

In accordance with NSPM-5, this general license &nbsp;excludes direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209 Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. Effective June 5, 2019, OFAC removed the authorization for group people-to-people educational travel. For more information on that change, see FAQ 704.) [09-23-2020]
&nbsp;



703. Are secondary schools and secondary school students permitted to engage in travel-related transactions under the general license for “educational activities”?

Yes. Educational exchanges, including study abroad programs, sponsored by Cuban or U.S. secondary schools involving secondary school students’ participation in a formal course of study or in a structured educational program offered by a secondary school or other academic institution, and led by a teacher or other secondary school official are authorized. Such exchanges must take place under the auspices of an organization that is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction, and a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction who is an employee, paid consultant, agent, or other representative of the sponsoring organization (including the leading teacher or secondary school official) must accompany each group traveling to Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.565(a)(2)(vi). This authorization allows for participation of a reasonable number of adult chaperones to accompany the secondary school students to Cuba. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. [09-23-20]



704. Can travelers still engage in “people-to-people travel” to Cuba on an individual basis or as a part of a group?

Generally, no. Effective June 5, 2019, there is no general license authorizing people-to-people educational activities in Cuba. The term “people-to-people travel” refers to an authorization that previously existed in the CACR, subject to conditions, for persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to engage in certain educational exchanges in Cuba on an individual basis or under the auspices of an organization that is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction and sponsors such exchanges to promote people-to-people contact.

On November 9, 2017, in accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended the general license for people-to-people educational activities in Cuba to remove the authorization for individual people-to-people educational travel. Effective June 5, 2019, in further accordance with the President’s foreign policy toward Cuba announced in April 2019, OFAC removed the authorization for group people-to-people educational travel in § 515.565(b). There is a grandfather [clause] in § 515.565(b) that authorizes certain group people-to-people educational travel that previously was authorized where the traveler had completed at least one travel-related transaction (such as purchasing a flight or reserving accommodation) prior to June 5, 2019. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210.

For purposes of that grandfather clause only, an “organization” is an entity subject to U.S. jurisdiction that sponsors educational exchanges that do not involve academic study pursuant to a degree program and that sponsors such exchanges to promote people-to-people contact. To the extent proposed travel falls within the scope of the grandfather clause for group people-to-people educational travel, organizations subject to U.S. jurisdiction may proceed with sponsoring such travel without applying to OFAC for a specific license. It is OFAC’s policy not to grant applications for a specific license authorizing transactions where a general license is available. OFAC will apply a policy of denial with respect to applications for a specific license authorizing prohibited people-to-people travel and related transactions effective June 5, 2019.

For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.565.

The export or reexport to Cuba of items subject to the EAR, including vessels and aircraft used to provide carrier services, requires separate authorization from the Department of Commerce. See 31 CFR § 515.533. For additional information regarding BIS’s latest travel-related amendments, see BIS’s Cuba webpage. [09-23-2020]



705. Who is generally authorized to engage in travel-related transactions for “religious activities”?

Section 515.566 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel- related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to religious activities in Cuba. All persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, including religious organizations located in the United States and members and staff of such organizations, are generally authorized to engage in travel-related transactions that are directly incident to engaging in religious activities in Cuba provided, among other things, that the travel must be for the purpose of engaging in a program of religious activities. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule in Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.566. [09-23-2020]



706. What constitutes generally authorized travel under the travel-related category of “public performances, clinics, workshops, athletic and other competitions, and exhibitions” ?

Section 515.567(a) of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to organization of and participation in amateur and semi-professional international sports federation competitions. Transactions incident to the organization of such competitions include marketing related to those specific events in Cuba. &nbsp;

Effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended section 515.567 to remove a general authorization related to public performances, clinics, workshops, other athletic or non-athletic competitions, and exhibitions previously found at § 515.567(b). OFAC will consider issuing specific licenses, on a case-by-case basis, for travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to participation in or organization of a public performance, clinic, workshop, athletic competition not covered by the general license in § 515.567(a), non-athletic competition, or exhibition in Cuba, subject to certain conditions. As a result of these amendments, effective September 24, 2020, the only remaining general license in Section 515.567 for participation in and organization of athletic competitions in Cuba will be the general license in § 515.567(a) for athletic competitions by amateur or semi-professional athletes or athletic teams.

In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the Cuba Restricted List. Also effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR&nbsp;§ 515.567. [09-23-2020]
&nbsp;



707. What constitutes “support for the Cuban people” for generally authorized travel and other transactions?

Section 515.574 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel-related transactions and other transactions that are intended to provide support for the Cuban people, which include activities of recognized human rights organizations; independent organizations designed to promote a rapid, peaceful transition to democracy; and individuals and non-governmental organizations that promote independent activity intended to strengthen civil society in Cuba. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license on November 8, 2017 to require that each traveler utilizing this authorization engage in a full-time schedule of activities that enhance contact with the Cuban people, support civil society in Cuba, or promote the Cuban people’s independence from Cuban authorities and that result in meaningful interactions with individuals in Cuba. OFAC also amended this general license to exclude from the authorization certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule in Cuba. An entire group does not qualify for this general license merely because some members of the group qualify individually. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.574. [09-23-2020]



708. What constitutes “humanitarian projects” for generally authorized transactions, including travel-related transactions?

Section 515.575 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, transactions, including travel-related transactions, that are related to humanitarian projects in or related to Cuba. These authorized humanitarian projects are: medical and health-related projects; construction projects intended to benefit legitimately independent civil society groups; disaster preparedness, relief, and response; historical preservation; environmental projects; projects involving formal or non-formal educational training, within Cuba or off-island, on the following topics: entrepreneurship and business, civil education, journalism, advocacy and organizing, adult literacy, or vocational skills; community-based grassroots projects; projects suitable to the development of small- scale private enterprise; projects that are related to agricultural and rural development that promote independent activity; microfinancing projects, except for loans, extensions of credit, or other financing prohibited by 31 CFR § 515.208; and projects to meet basic human needs. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. For persons traveling pursuant to this authorization, the traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule in Cuba. An entire group does not qualify for this general license merely because some members of the group qualify individually. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.575. [09-23-2020]



709. What constitutes “activities of private foundations or research or educational institutes” for generally authorized travel?

Section 515.576 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes, subject to conditions, travel- related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to activities by private foundations or research or educational institutes with an established interest in international relations to collect information related to Cuba for noncommercial purposes, among other things. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210.

The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule in Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.576.

Additionally, 31 CFR § 515.573(d) authorizes private foundations or research or educational institutes engaging in transactions authorized by § 515.576 to establish a physical presence in Cuba, such as an office. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.573(a). [09-23-2020]



710. What constitutes “exportation, importation, or transmission of information or informational materials” for generally authorized travel?

The general license at 31 CFR § 515.545(b)(1) authorizes, subject to conditions, travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to the exportation, importation, or transmission of information or informational materials. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full- time schedule in Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.545(b)(1).

The general license at 31 CFR §515.545(b)(2) authorizes, subject to conditions, travel-related transactions and other transactions that are directly incident to professional media or artistic productions of information or informational materials for exportation, importation, or transmission, including the filming or production of media programs (such as movies and television programs), the recording of music, and the creation of artworks in Cuba, provided that the traveler is regularly employed in or has demonstrated professional experience in a field relevant to such professional media or artistic productions. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Also, and effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The traveler’s schedule of activities must not include free time or recreation in excess of that consistent with a full-time schedule. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.545(b)(2).

The definition of “information and informational materials” may be found at 31 CFR § 515.332. [09-23-2020]



711. What are examples of a full-time schedule of activities for authorized travelers?

Authorized travelers to Cuba pursuant to most general license categories are expected to maintain a full-time schedule of activities consistent with the terms of the general license(s) pursuant to which they are traveling. For example:

&nbsp; &nbsp; An individual traveling to Cuba for four days pursuant to the authorization for professional research (31 CFR § 515.564(a)), such as a professional &nbsp;architect, could conduct two days of research on Cuban architectural heritage that directly relates to the traveler’s profession, followed by one day of meetings with Cuban nationals engaging in historical preservation of colonial and baroque buildings in Havana. The following day the traveler could engage in a full day of site visits and fact-finding around Havana at key architectural sites.
	&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;An individual traveling pursuant to the authorization for journalistic activities could engage in three full days of interviews with local residents, followed by one full day of follow-up investigative research at local institutions.
	&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;A group of friends traveling to Cuba could maintain a full-time schedule volunteering with a recognized non-governmental organization to build a school for underserved Cuban children with the local community (31 CFR § 515.574). The travelers would need to ensure that their activities promote independent activity intended to strengthen civil society in Cuba and that they engage in a full-time schedule of activities that enhance contact with the Cuban people, support civil society in Cuba, or promote the Cuban people’s independence from Cuban authorities, and result in meaningful interaction between the travelers and individuals in Cuba. [09-23-2020]
	&nbsp;



712. Can I purchase a ticket to Cuba directly from an airline based or operating out of the United States?

Yes, provided that you are authorized to travel to Cuba pursuant to an OFAC general or specific license. Airlines and travelers are responsible for maintaining records of their Cuba-related transactions for at least five years. [11-08-2017]



713. May a person that qualifies for the general license to provide carrier services transport a third-country national located in the United States to Cuba for travel authorized by a general license under one of the 12 categories of travel listed in Section 515.560 or by specific license from OFAC?

Yes. [11-08-2017]



714. May an individual authorized traveler take a commercial passenger ferry or use his or her private boat to travel to Cuba?

The export or reexport to Cuba of items subject to the EAR, including commercial vessels used to provide carrier services and private vessels, requires separate authorization from the Department of Commerce. See 31 CFR § 515.533. For a complete description of BIS s regulatory requirements, see BIS s Cuba webpage.

While 31 CFR § 515.572 generally authorizes the provision of carrier services, OFAC amended its regulations effective June 5, 2019 to highlight the separate BIS requirements. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572. [09-06-2019]



715. Are U.S. vessels, including commercial passenger ferries or private boats, permitted to carry passengers to or from Cuba?

The export or reexport to Cuba of items subject to the EAR, including commercial vessels used to provide carrier services and private vessels, requires separate authorization from the Department of Commerce. See 31 CFR § 515.533. For a complete description of BIS s regulatory requirements, see BIS s Cuba webpage.

While 31 CFR § 515.572 generally authorizes the provision of carrier services, and 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(4) generally authorizes the provision of lodging services by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are authorized to provide carrier services, OFAC amended its regulations effective June 5, 2019 to highlight the BIS requirements. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572. [09-06-2019]



716. Are authorized U.S. travelers permitted to travel onboard vessels in Cuba to meet their transportation needs within Cuba?

Travel onboard a vessel in Cuba is permitted for authorized travel. [11-08-2017]



717. Are there any spending limits for authorized U.S. travelers while in Cuba?

There is no specific dollar limit on authorized expenses; however, in accordance with National Security Presidential Memorandum-5 on Strengthening the Policy of the United States Toward Cuba, OFAC amended the Cuban Assets Control Regulations to restrict persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction from engaging in direct financial transactions with entities or subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List, with certain exceptions. See 31 CFR §§ 515.209 and 515.421. Consistent with these authorizations and restrictions, authorized travelers may engage in transactions ordinarily incident to travel within Cuba, including payment of living expenses and the acquisition in Cuba of goods for personal consumption there. OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.421 to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the State Department’s Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by 31 CFR § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. In addition, travelers are authorized to acquire in Cuba and import as accompanied baggage into the United States merchandise for personal use only; effective September 24, 2020, this authorization excludes imports into the United States of Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products. OFAC considers “personal use” of an imported item to include giving the item to another individual as a personal gift, but not the transfer of the item to another person for payment or other consideration. Value imports remain subject to the normal limits on duty and tax exemptions for merchandise imported as accompanied baggage and for personal use. [10-26-2020]



718. Are there any CACR restrictions on what foreign persons entering the United States from travel that included Cuba may bring in their accompanied baggage?

A non-U.S. person (i.e., not a U.S. citizen or resident) arriving in the United States is authorized to import Cuban-origin merchandise as accompanied baggage provided the merchandise is not in commercial quantities, is not imported for resale, and does not include Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products. &nbsp;See 31 CFR § 515.569. [09-23-2020]



719. Can I purchase Cuban-origin cigars and/or Cuban-origin rum or other alcohol while traveling in Cuba?

Persons authorized to travel to Cuba may purchase alcohol and tobacco products while in Cuba for personal consumption in Cuba. Please note that effective September 24, 2020, authorized travelers may no longer return to the United States with alcohol and/or tobacco products acquired in Cuba as accompanied baggage for personal use. [09-23-2020]



720. Can I purchase Cuban-origin cigars and/or Cuban-origin rum or other Cuban-origin alcohol while in a third country (i.e. not Cuba)?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may purchase or acquire Cuban-origin merchandise, including alcohol and tobacco products, while in a third country for personal consumption outside the United States. Please note that effective September 24, 2020, authorized travelers may no longer import such products into the United States. &nbsp;For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.585(c) and (d). [09-23-2020]



721. As an authorized traveler, may I travel from a third country to Cuba and from Cuba to a third country?

Yes, a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction engaging in authorized travel-related transactions may travel to Cuba from a third country or to a third country from Cuba. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction traveling to and from Cuba via a third country may only do so if their travel-related transactions are authorized by a general or specific license issued by OFAC, and such travelers are subject to the same restrictions and requirements as persons traveling directly from the United States. [11-08-2017]



722. May crew or other personnel involved in the operation of aircraft transporting authorized travelers to Cuba remain in Cuba along with the aircraft?

The general license authorizing travel-related transactions incident to the exportation or reexportation of authorized goods includes travel-related and such other transactions directly incident to the facilitation of the temporary sojourn of aircraft authorized by the Department of Commerce for travel between the United States and Cuba and that are transporting other authorized travelers. This authorization includes travel-related transactions by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are required for normal operation and service on board an aircraft or who are required to provide services to an aircraft on the ground. Travel-related transactions by such persons must be limited to the duration and scope of their duties in relation to the particular authorized temporary sojourn. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.533(c)(2).

For a complete description of BIS s regulatory requirements, see BIS s Cuba webpage. [09-06-2019].


Travel and Carrier Services


723. Do air carriers or vessel operators need to obtain specific licenses from OFAC to provide services?

No. A general license authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide carrier services by vessel or aircraft to, from, or within Cuba, in connection with authorized travel, without the need for a specific license from OFAC. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(2).

However, while no additional license is required from OFAC, the export or reexport of certain vessels or aircraft providing carrier services under § 515.572(a)(2) requires separate authorization from BIS. For a complete description of BIS s regulatory requirements, see BIS s Cuba webpage.

In addition, persons providing carrier services may still need to secure regulatory approvals from other concerned U.S. government agencies, including the Department of Transportation s Office of the Secretary and the Federal Aviation Administration, and the Department of Homeland Security. [06-04-2019]



724. Do travel service providers (such as travel agents and tour group operators) need to obtain specific licenses from OFAC to provide services for travel to Cuba?

No. A general license authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, including travel agents and tour group operators, to provide travel services in connection with authorized travel without the need for specific licenses from OFAC. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(1). In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Also, effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The provision of services related to travel for tourist activities or other unauthorized travel to Cuba remains prohibited. [09-23-2020]



725. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing carrier services to authorized travelers between the United States and Cuba provide such services via a third country?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized to provide carrier services either directly or indirectly between the United States and Cuba for authorized travelers, provided that they hold any additional authorizations required by other U.S. government agencies. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(2).

The export or reexport of vessels or aircraft providing carrier services under 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(2) requires separate authorization from BIS. For a complete description of BIS s regulatory requirements, see BIS s Cuba webpage. [09-06-2019]



726. In the case of a customer traveling to or from Cuba under a specific license, may providers of carrier and travel services collect and retain on file the specific license number in lieu of a physical or electronic copy of the license?

Yes. OFAC allows persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing authorized carrier or travel services to a customer traveling under a specific license to maintain either the specific license number or a copy of the license on file. See 31 CFR § 515.572(b)(1) Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing authorized carrier or travel services that choose to collect the specific license number in lieu of the license must maintain a record of that number, as well as the other required information set forth in § 515.572(b), for at least five years. [09-06-2019]



727. Are carrier and travel service providers required to verify that an individual traveler is authorized to travel to Cuba?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing authorized carrier or travel services must retain for at least five years from the date of the transaction a certification from each customer indicating the provision of the CACR that authorizes the person to travel to Cuba. In the case of a customer traveling under a specific license, a copy of the license or the license number must be maintained on file. The names and addresses of individual travelers must also be maintained on file for at least five years. See 31 CFR § 515.572(b). This information, including certifications and copies of licenses or license numbers, may be collected and maintained in any form, including electronically. [06-04-2019]



728. What types of arrangements may airlines enter into with a Cuban national (individual or entity) to facilitate the provision of carrier services between the United States and Cuba?

The entry into blocked space, code-sharing, or leasing agreements to facilitate the provision of carrier services by air is authorized. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(2)(ii). Transactions, including the remittance of payments, ordinarily incident to such arrangements are also authorized (see 31 CFR § 515.421). Further, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the State Department’s Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. Certain transactions ordinarily incident to such arrangements are also authorized (see 31 CFR § 515.421 for additional information and restrictions). [10-26-2020]



729. Which individuals may be transported between the United States and Cuba by a person that qualifies for the general license to provide carrier services?

&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are traveling to or from Cuba pursuant to a general license under one of the 12 categories of travel listed in section 515.560 of CACR, 31 CFR part 515 (CACR), or under a specific license from OFAC may be transported between the United States and Cuba.
	&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Cuban nationals applying for admission to the United States, as well as third-country nationals, with a valid visa or other travel authorization issued by the U.S. government may be transported to the United States from Cuba. (This includes individuals eligible to enter the United States under the Visa Waiver Program (VWP), as administered through the Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA).)
	&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;Cuban nationals present in the United States in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to other &nbsp;non-immigrant travel authorization issued by the U.S. government may be transported from the United States to Cuba. Cuban nationals who have taken up residence in the United States and are licensed as unblocked nationals pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.505(a)(1) are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction and may be transported between the United States and Cuba if they meet the criteria set out in the first bullet above.
	An individual, including a foreign national, who is traveling on official business of the U.S. government, a foreign government, or an intergovernmental organization of which the United States is a member or in which the United States holds observer status — including an employee, contractor, or grantee of such government or intergovernmental organization and any individual traveling on a diplomatic passport, as well as any close relative, as defined in 31 CFR § 515.339, accompanying the traveler — may be transported between the United States and Cuba.
Section 515.572 of the CACR authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide carrier services to, from, or within Cuba, in connection with travel and transportation of individuals between the United States and Cuba, directly or indirectly, authorized pursuant to the CACR. BIS regulates the temporary sojourn to Cuba of both aircraft and vessels, which in some cases is authorized by License Exception Aircraft, Vessels and Spacecraft (AVS) but may require separate authorization by BIS. Persons engaging in carrier services may require additional authorizations by other U.S. government agencies. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing travel or carrier services are required to retain for at least five years from the date of the transaction a certification from each customer indicating the section of the CACR, or a copy of the specific license or the specific license number, that authorizes the person to travel to Cuba. Certifications may be collected and maintained in any form, including electronically, and must be retained for at least five years from the date of the transaction. [10-14-2016]



730. What type of cargo may a person authorized to provide carrier services transport from the United States to Cuba?

Section 515.533 of the CACR authorizes all transactions ordinarily incident to the export to Cuba of items licensed or otherwise authorized by BIS. Accordingly, a person providing carrier services for authorized travelers going from the United States to Cuba may transport cargo and baggage accompanying an authorized traveler provided that the export of the cargo and baggage is authorized by BIS. Additionally, a person providing carrier services for authorized travelers going from the United States to Cuba may transport other cargo or unaccompanied baggage whose export to Cuba is authorized by BIS.

The exportation of information and informational materials, as defined in section 515.332 of the CACR, to Cuba from the United States is exempt from the prohibitions of the CACR. [10-14-2016]



731. What type of cargo may a person authorized to provide carrier services transport from Cuba to the United States?

Under the CACR, an authorized traveler departing Cuba for the United States may carry as accompanied baggage:

•&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;For persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, Cuban-origin items for personal use only, as authorized by 31 CFR § 515.560(c) (3). Please note that, as of September 24, 2020, this authorization no longer applies to Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products.
•&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;For foreign nationals, Cuban-origin items, provided that such goods are not in commercial quantities, are not imported for resale, and do not include Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products as authorized by 31 CFR § 515.569.&nbsp;
•&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;For all travelers, goods produced by Cuban entrepreneurs as authorized by 31 CFR &nbsp; &nbsp; § 515.582 and the State Department’s Section 515.582 List (available at www.state.gov/cuba-sanctions).
•&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;For a traveler who left the United States for Cuba and is now returning to the United States, any items the traveler temporarily exported to Cuba pursuant to a BIS authorization.
&nbsp;
Additionally, persons authorized to provide carrier services may transport from Cuba to the United States cargo, other than accompanied baggage, the importation of which has been authorized by general or specific license from OFAC, subject to obtaining any additional authorization(s) that may be required by any other relevant U.S. government agency.

The importation of Cuban-origin information and informational materials, as defined in section 515.332 of the CACR, is exempt from the prohibitions of the CACR. Imports authorized by OFAC would still be subject to other U.S. laws, such as import duties. [09-23-2020]


Remittances


732. What types of remittances are allowed to be made by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to persons in Cuba? What are the applicable conditions and requirements?

OFAC currently authorizes a number of categories of remittances from persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to persons in Cuba. The September 9, 2019 rule amended certain general licenses related to specific remittance categories, including family remittances. The September 9, 2019 rule also eliminated the general license for donative remittances that was previously located at 31 CFR § 515.570(b).

Family remittances. Effective October 9, 2019, OFAC placed a cap on family remittances of $1,000 in any consecutive three-month period. Accordingly, persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized to make remittances to nationals of Cuba who are close relatives of the remitter, provided that the remitter’s total family remittances to any one Cuban national do not exceed $1,000 in any consecutive three-month period. In addition, the recipient may not be a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, as defined in § 515.337 or a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, as defined in § 515.338, or a close relative of such persons, as defined in § 515.339. See 31 CFR § 515.570(a) for additional applicable conditions.

Remittances to certain individuals and independent non-governmental organizations in Cuba. Effective October 9, 2019, OFAC amended the general license that authorizes remittances to certain individuals and independent non-governmental organizations in Cuba to further authorize remittances that encourage the development and operation of private businesses by self-employed individuals. Section 515.340 of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations defines “self-employed individual” to mean a Cuban national who satisfies one or more of the following conditions: (a) is an owner or employee of a small private business or a sole proprietorship, including restaurants (paladares), taxis, and bed-and-breakfasts (casas particulares); (b) is an independent contractor or consultant; (c) is a small farmer who owns his or her own land; or (d) is a small usufruct farmer who cultivates state-owned land to sell products on the open market. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized to make remittances to individuals and independent non-governmental entities in Cuba, including pro-democracy groups and civil society groups, and to members of such groups or organizations, to support: humanitarian projects in or related to Cuba that are designed to directly benefit the Cuban people and the Cuban people through activities of recognized human rights organizations, independent organizations designed to promote a rapid, peaceful transition to democracy, and activities of individuals and non-governmental organizations that promote independent activity intended to strengthen civil society. See 31 CFR § 515.570(g) for additional applicable conditions.

Also, effective October 9, 2019, OFAC removed the general license that authorized persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to make donative remittances to persons in Cuba, and such remittances are no longer authorized. Finally, effective November 26, 2020, OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.570 to exclude from the scope of the authorization any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List.

See 31 CFR § 515.570 for a complete description of what the OFAC general licenses related to remittances authorize and the restrictions that apply, as well as statements of specific licensing policy.

For remittances from Cuban nationals to persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, see 31 CFR § 515.587. Please also note that, effective November 26, 2020, OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.587 to exclude from the scope of the authorization any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. [10-26-2020]



733. Is a bank, credit union, or money services business (MSB) such as a money remitter permitted to process my authorized remittances to or from Cuba?

Yes. Pursuant to a general license at 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(3), banking institutions, as defined in 31 CFR § 515.314, U.S.-registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S.-registered money transmitters are permitted to process authorized remittances to or from Cuba without having to obtain a specific license, subject to the recordkeeping and reporting requirements set forth in 31 C.F.R § 515.572(b). Please note, effective November 26, 2020, OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(3) to exclude from the scope of the authorization any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(3). [10-26-2020]


Banking


734. What is the Cuba Restricted List and how does it impact Cuba-related transactions?

In accordance with National Security Presidential Memorandum-5 on Strengthening the Policy of the United States Toward Cuba (NSPM-5) , the State Department publishes a list of entities and subentities that are under the control of, or act for or on behalf of, the Cuban military, intelligence, or security services or personnel, and with which direct financial transactions would disproportionately benefit the Cuban military, intelligence, or security services or personnel at the expense of the Cuban people or private enterprise in Cuba. This list is called the Cuba Restricted List, and is available on the State Department’s website at https://www.state.gov/cuba-sanctions/cuba-restricted-list/. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC maintains a prohibition to restrict direct financial transactions with entities and subentities on the Cuba Restricted List. For a complete description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. This prohibition applies to the following general licenses: §§ 515.530, 515.534, 515.545, 515.560, 515.561,515.564, 515.565, 515.566, 515.567, 515.572, 515.573, 515.574, 515.576, 515.577, 515.578, 515.581,515.584, and 515.590. For a complete description of what each general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see the aforementioned general licenses.

In addition, on October 27, 2020, OFAC also amended the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) to exclude from the scope of certain remittance-related general licenses any transactions relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List (CRL), effective November 26, 2020. This restriction is distinct from the prohibition in § 515.209, which, for example, contains certain exceptions for pre-existing commercial engagements with CRL entities or subentities. See Note 2 to § 515.209, reinforcing this distinction. Specifically, OFAC’s October 27, 2020 rule removes from the scope of certain general licenses any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity on the CRL, regardless of the existence of any pre-existing commercial engagements. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may use the 30 days before the rule becomes effective to wind down those engagements and make alternative arrangements.

Section 515.421 of the CACR contains an interpretive provision for incidental transactions where OFAC has clarified that authorized transactions ordinarily incident to licensed transactions and necessary to give effect thereto exclude direct financial transactions with such entities or subentities if the terms of the applicable general or specific license expressly exclude such direct financial transactions. OFAC also amended 31 CFR § 515.421 to make clear that a transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the CRL is not authorized as an ordinarily incident transaction where the terms of the general or specific license expressly exclude any such transactions. For a complete description of the scope of the interpretive provision and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.421. [10-26-2020]



735. What are examples of direct financial transactions with an entity or subentity on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List prohibited by 31 CFR § 515.209?

A person subject to U.S. jurisdiction traveling to Cuba to engage in an authorized family visit pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.561 is prohibited from engaging in direct financial transactions with the entities and subentities on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. As such, this traveler would not be authorized to book a hotel room directly with a hotel included on the Cuba Restricted List. &nbsp;

An individual working for a church subject to U.S. jurisdiction interested in establishing a physical presence in Cuba pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.573(d)(3) is prohibited from engaging in direct financial transactions with the entities and subentities on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. As such, this traveler would not be able to sign a new contract directly with a real estate company on the Cuba Restricted List to rent a location for the church’s physical presence.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;[11-08-2017]



736. May the U.S. dollar be used to conduct transactions in Cuba or with Cuban nationals?

In certain circumstances, yes. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may engage in transactions in U.S. dollars in Cuba or with Cuban nationals with respect to activity that is authorized pursuant to the CACR. For example, payments for telecommunications services in Cuba provided pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.542 may be made in U.S. dollars. Further, the use of U.S. dollars for transactions that are exempt from the prohibitions of or not otherwise prohibited by the CACR is also authorized. For example, payments related to the importation or exportation of informational materials as defined in 31 CFR § 515.332, such as books or musical recordings, may be made in U.S. dollars.

The September 9, 2019 amendment to the CACR eliminates the authorization for banking institutions subject to U.S. jurisdiction to process “U-turn” transactions in 31 CFR § 515.584(d). In addition, the amendment replaces the “U-turn” authorization with an authorization to reject such transactions. For more on changes to the “U-turn” general license, please see&nbsp; FAQ 757. [09-06-2019]



737. Are authorized travelers permitted to open bank accounts in Cuba?

Yes. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are traveling to Cuba pursuant to one of the 12 authorized categories of travel may open and maintain bank accounts in order to access funds while located in Cuba for authorized transactions, and are authorized to close such accounts. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.560(c)(6). In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. &nbsp;[09-06-2019]



738. Are authorized travelers in Cuba permitted to use credit or debit cards issued by a U.S. financial institution?

Yes. Authorized travelers in Cuba are permitted to use credit or debit cards issued by a U.S. financial institution with respect to activity that is authorized pursuant to the CACR. Travelers are advised to check with their financial institution before traveling to Cuba to determine whether the institution has established the necessary mechanisms for its issued credit or debit cards to be used in Cuba. See 31 CFR § 515.560(c)(5) and 515.584(c). [11-08-2017]



739. Can my bank refuse to allow me to use my credit or debit card in Cuba?

OFAC regulations do not require financial institutions or credit card companies to accept, maintain, or facilitate authorized financial relationships or transactions. [11-08-2017]



740. Can credit card network operators that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction process credit and debit card transactions for individuals traveling to, from, or within Cuba, and related settlements, for third-country financial institutions?

Yes, credit card network operators that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may process such transactions and related settlements for third-country financial institutions. Section 515.584(c) of the CACR authorizes all transactions incident to the processing and payment of credit and debit cards transactions for third-country nationals traveling to, from, or within Cuba. [11-08-2017]



741. Can credit card network operators that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction process credit and debit card transactions for individuals traveling to, from, or within Cuba, and related settlements, for third-country financial institutions?

Yes, credit card network operators that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may process such transactions and related settlements for third-country financial institutions. Section 515.584(c) of the CACR authorizes all transactions incident to the processing and payment of credit and debit cards transactions for third-country nationals traveling to, from, or within Cuba. [11-08-2017]



742. Are financial institutions other than banks permitted to open correspondent accounts in Cuba?

Depository institutions, as defined in 31 CFR § 515.333, which include certain financial institutions other than banks, are permitted to open correspondent accounts at banks in Cuba. See 31 CFR § 515.584(a). [11-08-2017]



743. Are Cuban banks permitted to open correspondent accounts at U.S. banks?

No. U.S. depository institutions are permitted to open correspondent accounts at Cuban banks located in Cuba and in third countries, and at foreign banks located in Cuba, but Cuban banks are not generally licensed to open such accounts at U.S. banks. See note to 31 CFR § 515.584(a). [11-08-2017]



744. May correspondent accounts authorized pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.584(a) or used for transactions authorized by 31 CFR § 515.584(g) be established and maintained in U.S. dollars?

Yes. Correspondent accounts of depository institutions (as defined in 31 CFR § 515.333) at a financial institution that is a national of Cuba authorized pursuant to § 515.584(a) may be established and maintained in U.S. dollars. Such accounts may be used only for transactions that are authorized by or exempt from the CACR. Transactions necessary to establish and maintain such correspondent accounts — such as originating, processing, and terminating authorized funds transfers in U.S. dollars — are authorized.

Additionally, correspondent accounts used for transactions authorized by 31 CFR § 515.584(g), which permits banking institutions as defined in 31 CFR § 515.314(g) that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to accept, process, and give credit to U.S. dollar monetary instruments presented indirectly by a financial institution that is a national of Cuba, may be denominated in U.S. dollars.

However, financial institutions that are nationals of Cuba remain prohibited from opening correspondent accounts at a U.S. financial institution. For a complete description of what these general licenses authorize and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.584(a) and (g). [11-08- 2017]



745. May U.S. banks open and operate accounts for Cuban nationals lawfully present in the United States?

Banking institutions are permitted to maintain accounts for certain Cuban nationals present in the United States in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to other non-immigrant travel authorization. Although the account may remain open while the Cuban national is not in the United States, access to such accounts must be limited to while the Cuban national is lawfully present in the United States. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.571(a)(5). A Cuban national in Cuba would not be able to access such an account to make and receive certain payments pursuant to the authorization in 31 CFR § 515.584(h); separate accounts would be required to utilize each of these authorizations. [09-06-2019]



746. Can Cuban nationals lawfully present in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to another non-immigrant travel authorization issued by the U.S. government earn a salary?

Cuban nationals lawfully present in the United States in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to another non-immigrant travel authorization issued by the U.S. government may receive any salary or other compensation consistent with the individual s non-immigrant status or applicable non-immigrant travel authorization provided that the recipient is not subject to any special tax assessment by the Cuban government in connection with the receipt of such salary or other compensation. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.571. [09-06-2019]



747. May U.S. banks, their foreign branches, and foreign subsidiaries open and operate accounts for Cuban nationals in third countries?

Section 515.585 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes all persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide goods and services to Cuban national individuals located in a third country, provided that the transaction does not involve commercial exportation to or from Cuba. Additionally, the general license authorizes banking institutions to open, maintain, and close bank accounts for such Cuban nationals, provided that such accounts are used only while the Cuban national is located outside of Cuba and may not be used for transactions that involve a commercial exportation of goods or services to or from Cuba. For a complete description of what the OFAC general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.585. [09-06-2019]



748. May U.S. banks open and operate accounts for Cuban nationals present in Cuba?

Section 515.584(h) of the CACR contains a general license that allows banking institutions to open and maintain bank accounts in the United States for Cuban nationals in Cuba to receive payments in the United States for transactions authorized pursuant to, or exempt from the prohibitions of, the CACR and to remit such payments back to Cuba. For example, an author who is a Cuban national located in Cuba may open an account with a bank or online payment platform in the United States to receive payments for sales of her book. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.584(h). [09-06-2019]



749. In what ways can Cuban nationals lawfully present in the United States participate in the U.S. financial system?

Certain Cuban nationals who have taken up residence in the United States on a permanent basis and who meet the requirements set forth in 31 CFR § 515.505(a) are licensed as unblocked nationals, and may participate fully in the U.S. financial system. See 31 CFR §§ 515.505(a)(1) and (d).

Pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.571, Cuban nationals who are present in the United States in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to other non-immigrant travel authorization issued by the U.S. government, such as a non-immigrant visa, may open and maintain bank accounts in the United States, provided that the Cuban-national account holder may only access the account while lawfully present in the United States. Section 515.571 also authorizes such Cuban nationals to engage in normal banking transactions involving foreign currency drafts, travelers checks, or other instruments negotiated incident to travel in the United States. [11-08-2017]



750. If a Cuban national resident in the United States has applied to become a lawful permanent resident alien of the United States, does that individual have to apply to OFAC to be treated as an unblocked national?

No. If a Cuban national has taken up residence in the United States and has applied to become a lawful permanent resident alien of the United States and has an adjustment of status application pending, then the Cuban national is considered unblocked and does not need to apply to OFAC to be treated as an unblocked national, provided that he or she is not a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba or a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist party. See 31 CFR § 515.505(a)(1). [11-08-2017]



751. Should financial institutions apply for a specific license to unblock funds transfers or accounts which meet the conditions for unblocking set forth in 31 CFR §§ 515.505, or 515.584 (e)?

The CACR include a general license authorizing banking institutions to unblock any account that had been previously blocked solely because of the interest therein of one or more persons now licensed as unblocked nationals. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.505(b).

The CACR also include a general license at 31 CFR § 515.584(e) that authorizes the unblocking and return of funds transfers that could have been processed pursuant to 31 CFR §§ 515.562(b) or 515.579(b), if the processing of those transfers would have been authorized by the current text of the general licenses. Funds unblocked pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.584(e) that were originally blocked on or after August 25, 1997 must be reported to OFAC. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.584.

If your situation appears to meet the requirements of these general licenses, OFAC suggests that you contact the financial institution maintaining the blocked account or blocked funds transfer to request that it review your situation within the context of the terms of the appropriate general license. If the terms of a general license apply, there is no need to seek specific license authorization from OFAC. It is OFAC s policy not to grant specific licenses authorizing transactions for which the provisions of an outstanding general license are applicable. See 31 CFR § 501.801(a). [09-06-2019]



752. Do U.S. banking institutions need to apply for a specific license to release funds transfers or accounts previously blocked pursuant to the CACR that are now authorized by general license?

If a transaction was previously blocked pursuant to the CACR at the time of the transaction, and the CACR was later amended to allow similar transactions, the earlier transaction is not unblocked unless the CACR amendments include a general license that unblocks previously blocked funds. Transactions must be authorized pursuant to the CACR at the time that they are processed. To the extent that the unblocking of a funds transfer or blocked account is not authorized by a general license, a specific license would be required to release funds transfers or unblock accounts previously blocked. [11-08-2017]



753. Is a financial institution required to independently verify that an individual s travel is authorized when processing Cuba travel-related transactions?

No. A financial institution may rely on U.S. travelers to provide their certifications of authorized travel directly to the person providing travel or carrier services when processing Cuba travel-related transactions, unless the financial institution knows or has reason to know that the travel is not authorized by a general or specific license.

The CACR requires persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction providing travel or carrier services to retain for at least five years from the date of the transaction a certification from each customer indicating the section of the CACR that authorizes the person to travel to Cuba. See 31 CFR §515.572(b). U.S. travelers utilizing a general or specific license are also required to retain for five years records associated with their travel to Cuba. [11-08-2017]



754. Is the U.S. originating bank or U.S. beneficiary bank required to independently verify that a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction is not engaging in a direct financial transaction as defined in § 515.209 when processing Cuba-related transactions?

No. To the extent the transaction involves an entity or subentity on the Cuba Restricted List, a financial institution can rely on the statements of its customer that the transaction is authorized unless it knows or has reason to know the transaction is not authorized. A financial institution is expected to do its normal due diligence with respect to a transaction involving Cuba or a Cuban national. [11-08-2017]



755. Is a U.S. or third-country financial institution required to independently verify that the underlying transactions giving rise to U.S. dollar monetary instruments presented for processing and payment pursuant to § 515.584(g) are authorized?
No. A financial institution receiving U.S. dollar monetary instruments for processing and payment directly or indirectly (in the case of a U.S. banking institution) may rely on the institution having presented such monetary instruments as confirmation that the underlying transactions are authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited, unless the financial institution knows or has reason to know that the transaction is not authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.584(g). [11-08-2017]



756. May a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction utilize online payment platforms to facilitate or process authorized transactions involving Cuba or a Cuban entity?

Yes. Subject to certain exceptions, transactions that are ordinarily incident to an authorized transaction are permitted. See the examples in 31 CFR § 515.421. Such transactions may include use of online payment platforms to facilitate authorized transactions. Authorized transactions ordinarily incident to licensed transactions exclude direct financial transactions with Cuba Restricted List entities, as well as, effective September 24, 2020, lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210, if the terms of the applicable general or specific license expressly exclude such transactions. See 31 CFR § 515.421(5)-(6). Also, effective November 26, 2020, OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.421 to make clear that a transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the Cuba Restricted List is not authorized as an ordinarily incident transaction where the terms of the general or specific license expressly exclude any such transactions. For a complete description of the scope of transactions ordinarily incident to a licensed transaction and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.421. [10-26-2020]



757. Are U.S. banking institutions authorized to process  U-turn transactions in which Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest?

No. Effective October 9, 2019, banking institutions subject to U.S. jurisdiction are not permitted to process  U-turn transactions, i.e., funds transfers originating and terminating outside the United States, where neither the originator nor the beneficiary is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction. While banking institutions subject to U.S. jurisdiction are no longer authorized to process  U-turn transactions, they are authorized to reject such transactions, subject to certain conditions (see 31 CFR § 515.584(d). [09-06-2019]


VI. Trade/Business


758. Is Cuba open for U.S. business and investment?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are prohibited from doing business or investing in Cuba unless authorized by OFAC. An OFAC general license authorizes, subject to certain conditions and limitations, the exportation from the United States, and the reexportation from third countries, of items to Cuba where the exportation or reexportation is licensed or otherwise authorized by BIS. See 31 CFR § 515.533(a). BIS currently authorizes certain categories of items to be exported or reexported to Cuba. In addition, OFAC currently generally licenses the establishment of a business presence or physical presence in Cuba for certain types of entities or persons. See 31 CFR § 515.573. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended the general licenses for the establishment of a business presence or physical presence in Cuba to exclude from the authorizations certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. [09-06-2019]



759. Does the prohibition in 31 CFR § 515.209(a) require US businesses engaged in the Cuban market and that may undertake direct financial transactions with entities included on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List to terminate their Cuba-related business relationships pursuant to the regulatory amendments?

Consistent with the Administration’s interest in not negatively impacting U.S. businesses for engaging in lawful commercial opportunities, most existing Cuba-related commercial engagements that include direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List continue to be permitted, pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.209 (c), provided that those commercial engagements were in place prior to November 9, 2017 (or the date the entity or subentity was otherwise added to the Cuba Restricted List, as published in the Federal Register). For example, businesses will be permitted to continue with authorized transactions outlined in contingent or other types of contractual arrangements agreed to prior to the issuance of the 2017 regulations, consistent with other OFAC authorizations. However, effective November 26, 2020, persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction will no longer be authorized to engage in any transactions relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List, regardless of whether any commercial engagements with the entity or subentity were in place prior to November 9, 2017 (or the date the entity or subentity was otherwise added to the Cuba Restricted List, as published in the Federal Register). For a complete description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply to transactions relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances, see 31 CFR §§ 515.209, 515.421, 515.570. 515.572(a)(3) and 515.587. [10-26-2020]



760. How do U.S. companies know if a Cuban counterpart is affiliated with an entity or subentity on the Cuba Restricted List?

The names of the entities and subentities that the State Department identifies as meeting the criteria set forth in NSPM-5 are published on the Cuba Restricted List, which is available on the State Department’s website and in the Federal Register (updates to the Cuba Restricted List will also be published in the Federal Register). Entities or subentities that are owned or controlled by another entity or subentity on the Cuba Restricted List are not treated as restricted unless also specified by name on the Cuba Restricted List. The Cuba Restricted List is maintained by the State Department on its website: https://www.state.gov/cuba-sanctions/cuba-restricted-list/. [11-08-2017]



761. Can U.S. trade delegations travel to Cuba?

Trade delegations are authorized to travel to Cuba only if each member of the delegation meets the criteria of an applicable general license authorizing travel to Cuba or has obtained a specific license from OFAC. Authorized trade delegations generally fall under one of two general licenses for travel authorization: either (1) 31 CFR § 515.533(c)(1), which authorizes travel-related and other transactions incident to the exportation of certain authorized goods from the U.S. to Cuba, specifically the conduct of “market research, commercial marketing, sales or contract negotiation, accompanied delivery, installation, leasing, servicing, or repair in Cuba of items consistent with the export or reexport licensing policy of the Commerce Department,” or (2) 31 CFR § 515.564(a), which authorizes transactions related to professional research in Cuba. Further, please note that, effective September 24, 2020, OFAC has amended both general licenses to exclude from the authorizations lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. For a complete description of what these general licenses authorize and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR §§ 515.533(c)(1) and 515.564(a). [09-23-2020]



762. May U.S. companies exporting authorized goods to Cuba assemble such goods in Cuba?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction that are exporting or reexporting items to Cuba pursuant to an authorization from the Department of Commerce or OFAC or that are otherwise exempt may assemble such items in Cuba provided that the assembly does not involve the incorporation of Cuban-origin goods into items assembled or the processing of any raw materials into finished goods in Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see the note to 31 CFR § 515.573(c)(3). [11-08-2017]



763. If an authorized export to Cuba requires servicing or repair, may a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction import the item into the United States or a third country for such servicing or repair?

Yes, provided such items were exported or reexported to Cuba pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.533(a) or 31 CFR § 515.559. For a complete description of what this general licenses authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.533(b). The exportation or reexportation of repaired or replacement items to Cuba must be separately authorized pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.533(a) or § 515.559, in addition to any Department of Commerce authorization that may be required. [09- 06-2019]



764. Does 31 CFR § 515.533(a) authorize foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies to export from a third country to Cuba foreign-manufactured items that are subject to the EAR?

No. Consistent with Section 1706 of the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992, (CDA), the general license provided at 31 CFR § 515.533(a) does not authorize any transaction between a U.S.-owned or -controlled firm in a third country and Cuba for the exportation to Cuba of commodities produced in a country other than the United States or Cuba. Such transactions must be specifically licensed pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.559 in addition to any required authorization from the Department of Commerce. There are also restrictions imposed by the CDA on the types of transactions that may be licensed pursuant to that section. [11-08-2017]


765. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction open an office in Cuba?
Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may establish and maintain a physical presence, such as an office, warehouse, or retail outlet, in Cuba to engage in transactions authorized by or exempt from the CACR in the following categories: entities engaging in non-commercial activities authorized by section
515.574 (support for the Cuban people); entities engaging in humanitarian projects set forth in section 515.575(b) (humanitarian projects); private foundations or research or educational institutes engaging in transactions authorized by § 515.576; news bureaus; exporters of certain goods authorized for export or reexport pursuant to 31 CFR §§ 515.533 and 515.559; entities providing mail or parcel transmission services; providers of telecommunications or internet-based services; entities organizing or conducting certain educational activities; religious organizations; and providers of carrier and certain travel services. These persons may employ Cuban nationals in Cuba as well as persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction in Cuba (and such persons may maintain a domicile in Cuba). These persons may open and maintain bank accounts to facilitate authorized transactions. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List.
For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.573. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction that do not meet the terms of the general license may apply to OFAC for a specific license. Such applications will be reviewed on a case-by- case basis. Additional authorizations from the Cuban government may also be required. [09-06-2019]


766. What types of payment or financing terms may be utilized for authorized exports and reexports of items other than agricultural commodities to Cuba?
Section 515.533(a) of the CACR does not restrict payment and financing terms for exports of items from the United States or reexports of 100 percent U.S-origin items from a third country, other than agricultural commodities. Examples of permissible payment and financing terms for authorized exports and reexports that are not agricultural commodities include: payment of cash in advance; sales on an open account; and financing by U.S. or third-country financial institutions.

OFAC has issued a general license authorizing banking institutions to provide financing for such authorized exports or reexports of items other than agricultural commodities, including issuing, advising, negotiating, paying, or confirming letters of credit (including letters of credit issued by a financial institution that is a national of Cuba), accepting collateral for issuing or confirming letters of credit, and processing documentary collections. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.584(f). In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization certain direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a description of the scope of the prohibition on direct financial transactions and the restrictions and exceptions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.209. [09-06-2019]
&nbsp;



767. What types of payment or financing terms may be utilized for authorized exports and reexports of agricultural commodities to Cuba?

For such exports and reexports, only the following payment and financing terms may be used: payment of cash in advance, or financing by a banking institution located in a third country, subject to certain restrictions. This limitation is required by the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000, 22 U.S.C. § 7207(b)(1). See 31 CFR § 515.533(a)(4). This provision only applies to exports and reexports of “agricultural commodities,” as defined in 15 CFR part 772, and not to exports or reexports of “agricultural items” authorized pursuant to 15 CFR § 746.2(b)(2)(iv). [09- 06-2019]



768. What does the regulatory term  cash in advance mean?

The regulatory interpretation of  cash in advance, which describes one of the permissible payment and financing terms for authorized exports and reexports of agricultural commodities, is  cash before transfer of title and control. For the full text, see 31 CFR § 515.533. [11-08-2017]



769. What types of Cuban-origin goods are authorized for importation directly into the United States?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction authorized to travel to Cuba may import into the United States as accompanied baggage merchandise acquired in Cuba provided that the merchandise is for personal use only. Please note that, as of September 24, 2020, this authorization no longer applies to the import into the United States of Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products. See 31 CFR § 515.560. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction located in third countries may purchase or acquire Cuban-origin merchandise and may import such merchandise into the United States as accompanied baggage provided that the merchandise is for personal use only; however, effective September 24, 2020, this authorization excludes imports into the United States of Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products. See 31 CFR § 515.585. Foreign persons traveling to the United States from a third country may import into the United States as accompanied baggage Cuban-origin merchandise provided that the merchandise is not in commercial quantities, is not imported for resale, and does not include alcohol or tobacco products. See 31 CFR § 515.569. In addition, Cuban nationals who are present in the United States in a non-immigrant status or pursuant to other non-immigrant travel authorization issued by the U.S. government are no longer authorized to bring Cuban-origin alcohol or tobacco products for personal use as accompanied baggage. See 31 CFR § 515.571. Normal limits on duty and tax exemptions for merchandise imported as accompanied baggage will apply.&nbsp;

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are also authorized to import certain goods produced by independent Cuban entrepreneurs as determined by the State Department, as set forth in the State Department’s Section 515.582 list. If these goods are for personal use, certain personal exemptions from U.S. Customs and Border Protection may apply.

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are also authorized to import Cuban-origin software, including Cuban-origin mobile applications. See 31 CFR § 515.578.

The importation into the United States of merchandise from Cuba or Cuban-origin merchandise from a third country intended as gifts is authorized, provided that the value of the merchandise is not more than $100, the merchandise is of a type and in quantities normally given as gifts between individuals, the merchandise is sent and not carried by a traveler, and the merchandise is not alcohol or tobacco products. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.544.

The importation into the United States from Cuba of information and informational materials is exempt from the prohibitions of the CACR. The definition of “information and informational materials” may be found at 31 CFR § 515.332. [09-23-2020]
&nbsp;



770. What types of goods and services produced by independent Cuban entrepreneurs are authorized for importation into the United States from Cuba pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.582?

Pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.582 of the CACR, certain goods and services produced by independent Cuban entrepreneurs, as set forth in a list maintained by the State Department on its website, are authorized for importation, and persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may engage in associated transactions necessary to import these authorized goods and services. The State Department list provides details of the goods and services authorized for importation into the U.S. from Cuba pursuant to this provision. This list references sections and chapters of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS) of the United States to indicate categories of goods that are not eligible for importation into the United States pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.582, even if such goods were produced by independent Cuban entrepreneurs; any other goods produced by independent Cuban entrepreneurs and not covered by the listed sections and chapters of the HTS may be imported, as provided in the State Department’s Section 515.582 list and subject to compliance with all other relevant requirements under state and federal law and regulations. 31 CFR § 515.582 of the CACR authorizes the importation of all services supplied by independent Cuban entrepreneurs, again, as provided in the State Department’s Section 515.582 list and subject to compliance with other requirements in state and federal law and regulations. [11-08-2017]



771. May a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction provide training to a Cuban distributor or customer on the use of goods authorized for export to Cuba by the Department of Commerce?

Yes. OFAC considers the provision of training to persons in Cuba, including to Cuban nationals, on the use of items authorized for export or reexport to Cuba by the Department of Commerce to be ordinarily incident to the export or reexport of the item and therefore authorized by 31 CFR § 515.533(a). Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized, subject to certain conditions, to travel to Cuba to provide such training. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.533(c)(1). Please note that OFAC amended 31 CFR § 515.533 to exclude from the authorization lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. The exportation or reexportation to Cuba of technology subject to the EAR may require separate authorization from the Department of Commerce. [09-23-2020]



772. Are insurers that are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction allowed to provide travel insurance to persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction engaged in authorized travel to Cuba?

Yes. See 31 CFR § 515.560. [11-08-2017]



773. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction engaged in authorized travel to Cuba obtain travel insurance from a third-country vendor?

Yes. See 31 CFR § 515.560. [11-08-2017]



774. May U.S. insurers issue policies and pay claims related to group health, life, and travel insurance on behalf of third-country nationals traveling to or within Cuba?

Yes, provided that the insurance policy is a global policy, and not specific to the third-country national’s travel to or within Cuba. Section 515.580 of the CACR authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to issue or provide global health, life, or travel insurance policies for individuals ordinarily resident in a country outside of Cuba who travel to or within Cuba, regardless of whether the insurance policy is issued only to that individual or to a group, such as to all employees of a particular company. For instance, a U.S. insurer may pay medical claims pursuant to a group health insurance policy to or on behalf of a covered third-country national injured while traveling in Cuba. However, this provision does not authorize a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction to issue an insurance policy that is specific to travel to Cuba. A separate provision of the CACR, § 515.560, authorizes the provision of health, life, and travel insurance-related services that are specific to Cuba for authorized U.S. travelers. Also, effective September 24, 2020, OFAC amended § 515.560 to exclude from the authorization at § 515.560(c)(2) lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property in Cuba on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List to the extent prohibited by § 515.210. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. [09-23-2020]


775. May U.S. insurers, either directly or through third-country subsidiaries, issue policies, or pay insurance or reinsurance claims related to non-U.S. persons providing goods or services that facilitate travel by third-country nationals from a third country to Cuba?
Other than certain global health, life, or travel insurance policies for individuals authorized by 31 CFR § 515.580, absent specific authorization from OFAC, U.S. insurers and their subsidiaries are not permitted to issue policies, provide reinsurance coverage, or pay insurance or reinsurance claims related to non-U.S. persons, including entities such as foreign airlines, providing goods or services that facilitate travel by third-country nationals from a third country to Cuba.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; [11-08-2017]



776. Are health, life, or travel insurance policies that are issued to a  group (e.g., an employer and its employees) authorized by the CACR?

Section 515.580 of the CACR authorizes global health, life, or travel insurance policies covering individuals ordinarily resident in a country outside of Cuba traveling to Cuba. The policy may be issued to a group, such as all employees of a company. The  global requirement means it cannot be specific to travel to Cuba. For example, it does not authorize an individual travel policy issued to a traveler specifically to cover a trip to Cuba. It also does not authorize issuing a policy to a non-U.S. travel agent specifically to cover its traveler clients where the travel agency is solely in the business of planning trips to Cuba. [11-08-2017]



777. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction provide certain insurance-related services (such as cargo or hull insurance, or reinsurance) to persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are engaging in authorized activity in Cuba?

Where the provision of insurance-related services is directly incident to activity authorized by general or specific license, then the provision of such services is authorized as well. For example, § 515.566 of the CACR authorizes travel and travel-related transactions directly incident to engaging in religious activities in Cuba. The provision of health insurance-, life insurance-, and travel insurance-related services to authorized travelers traveling to Cuba pursuant to § 515.566 would be authorized. For additional information, see Note 2 to 31 CFR § 515.560. As an additional example, the provision of insurance to a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction that is incident to convening authorized athletic competitions, as defined in 31 CFR § 515.567(a), would also be authorized.

Additionally, § 515.533 of the CACR authorizes transactions ordinarily incident to the exportation or reexportation to Cuba of certain goods licensed or otherwise authorized by the Department of Commerce. Transactions directly incident to the exportation or reexportation of such goods, such as the provision of cargo insurance for the transportation of the goods, are authorized by § 515.533. For additional information, see Note 1 to paragraph (a) of 31 CFR § 515.533.

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, however, are prohibited from engaging in reinsurance arrangements where the underlying activity is not authorized by the CACR. For example, a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction would be prohibited from participating in a reinsurance arrangement that involved coverage for a foreign company that provides investment opportunities in Cuban state- owned businesses. [09-23-2020]



778. Does a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction require an OFAC specific license to pay an insurance claim that arises from authorized activity in Cuba if the payment involves a Cuban national?

Where the provision of insurance-related services is authorized by general license, either expressly or as a transaction ordinarily incident to a licensed transaction, this authorization extends to the payment or settlement of claims, including to a Cuban national. [11-08-2017]



779. What are the “180-day rule” and the “goods/passengers-on-board rule”?

The 180-day rule is a statutory restriction prohibiting any vessel that enters a port or place in Cuba to engage in the trade of goods or the purchase or provision of services there from entering any U.S. port for the purpose of loading or unloading freight for 180 days after leaving Cuba, unless authorized by OFAC. This restriction is applied even if a vessel has stopped in Cuba solely to purchase services unrelated to the trade of goods, such as planned ship maintenance. The 180-day rule is separate from a second statutory restriction – the goods/passengers-on-board rule – which prohibits any vessel carrying goods or passengers to or from Cuba or carrying goods in which Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest from entering a U.S. port with such goods or passengers on board, unless authorized or exempt. There are certain exceptions to these rules. For a complete description of the 180-day rule, the goods/passengers-on-board rule, and the general licenses and exemptions that apply, see 31 CFR §§ 515.206, 515.207, and 515.550. [11-08-2017]



780. Are there any exceptions to the 180-day rule and the goods/passengers-on-board rule?

Yes. OFAC has authorized by general license certain exceptions to these rules. If a vessel engages only in one or more of the following activities with Cuba, it will qualify for the general license and therefore will not be subject to the 180-day rule or the goods/passengers-on-board rule:

Engaging or has engaged in trade with Cuba authorized under the CACR, such as a vessel carrying goods from the United States that are licensed or otherwise authorized for export or reexport to Cuba by the U.S. Department of Commerce pursuant to the EAR;
	Engaging or has engaged in trade with Cuba that is exempt from the prohibitions of the CACR, such as a vessel carrying exclusively informational materials;
	Engaging or has engaged in the export or reexport from a third country to Cuba of agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices that, were they subject to the EAR, would be designated as EAR99;
	Carrying or has carried persons between the United States and Cuba or within Cuba pursuant to the general license for the provision of carrier services under the CACR; or
	A foreign vessel that has entered a port or place in Cuba while carrying students, faculty, and staff that are authorized to travel to Cuba pursuant to the general license for educational activities under the CACR.
Additionally, if a vessel’s only transactions with Cuba are the exportation to Cuba from a third country of items that, were they subject to the EAR, would be designated as EAR99 or controlled on the Commerce Control List only for anti-terrorism reasons, the vessel will not be subject to the 180- day rule.

These exceptions to the 180-day rule do not apply to a vessel that:

Carries for export to Cuba any additional goods that, were they subject to the EAR, would not be designated as EAR99 or controlled on the Commerce Control List only for anti-terrorism reasons;
	Picks up any goods in Cuba, unless the transactions involving those goods are authorized by OFAC or exempt from the prohibitions of the CACR; or
	Purchases or provides services in Cuba, other than docking, unloading, or other services associated with normal shipping transactions.
For a complete description of the 180-day rule, the goods/passengers-on-board rule, and the general licenses and exemptions that apply, see 31 CFR §§ 515.206, 515.207, and 515.550. [09-06-2019]
&nbsp;



781. Do the exceptions to the 180-day rule authorize shipments to or from Cuba?

No. The general licenses involving the 180-day rule only authorize certain vessels to enter a U.S. port within 180 days after leaving a port or place in Cuba; they do not authorize any shipments to or from Cuba. Shipments to or from Cuba may be separately authorized under other provisions of the CACR or, as in the case of most shipments from third countries to Cuba, may simply not be subject to the restrictions of the CACR, though other U.S. government agency restrictions may apply. For a complete description of the 180-day rule and the general licenses and exemptions that apply, see 31 CFR §§ 515.206, 515.207(a), and 515.550. [11-08-2017]



782. If a foreign vessel is traveling to the United States via Cuba with cargo destined for the United States, may goods remain aboard the vessel for delivery to the United States while the vessel is docked in a Cuban port, and may that vessel and its cargo then enter the United States without being subject to the 180-day rule or the goods/passengers-on-board rule?

Yes, provided that no other factors trigger the 180-day rule or the goods/passengers-on-board rule. For example, no goods may be unloaded in Cuba other than goods that would be designated as EAR99 or controlled on the Commerce Control List only for anti-terrorism reasons if they had been exported from the United States; and no merchandise may be loaded in Cuba that is not licensed or exempt. Goods entering the United States that remained on board the ship while it docked in a Cuban port are not considered goods carried to or from Cuba or goods in which Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest for purposes of the goods/passengers-on-board rule. Furthermore, such goods are not considered goods that have been located in or transported through Cuba for the purposes of 31 CFR § 515.204, which prohibits the importation of certain merchandise into the United States. For a complete description of the 180-day rule, the goods/passengers-on-board rule, the importation prohibition, and the general licenses and exemptions that apply, see 31 CFR §§ 515.204, 515.206, 515.207, and 515.550. [11-08-2017]



783. May companies that use different ocean carriers as part of a broader shipping service utilizing code-sharing agreements take advantage of the exceptions to the  180-day rule ?

The exceptions to the 180-day rule apply to each individual vessel that meets the requirements of the general license irrespective of any code-sharing arrangement. Thus, any shipping company may deploy a vessel in a broader shipping arrangement and, so long as the vessel meets the terms of the general license, that vessel may enter a U.S. port accordingly. There is no requirement for authorization of the individual companies or the broader code-sharing arrangement. Code-sharing agreements do not affect the general license or its requirements. [11-08-2017]


VII. Telecommunications


784. What types of telecommunications services are authorized under general license?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized to engage in transactions that establish mechanisms to provide commercial telecommunications services in Cuba or linking third countries and Cuba. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are also authorized to engage in telecommunications-related transactions, including payment related to the provision of telecommunications involving Cuba or provided to Cuban individuals. Pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.542, U.S. persons may, for example, purchase calling cards for people to use in Cuba or pay the bills of such people directly to a telecommunications operator located in Cuba, such as ETECSA. These steps to facilitate improved access to telecommunications services for Cubans and increased international connections are intended to increase the ability of the Cuban people to communicate freely and to better provide for efficient and adequate telecommunications services between the United States and Cuba.

The CACR define telecommunications services to include data, telephone, telegraph, internet connectivity, radio, television, news wire feeds, and similar services, regardless of medium of transmission, including transmission by satellite. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.542.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; [09-06-2019]



785. What types of internet-based services are authorized under general license?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may provide certain services incident to internet-based communications and related to certain authorized exportations and reexportations of communications items. For example, transactions incident to providing fee-based internet communications services such as e-mail or other messaging platforms, social networking, VOIP, web-hosting, or domain-name registration are authorized in most circumstances. Services related to many kinds of software (including applications) used on personal computers, cell phones, and other personal communications devices are also authorized, along with other services related to the use of such devices. Finally, services such as cloud storage, software design, business consulting, and the provision of IT management and support related to use of hardware and software exported or reexported to Cuba pursuant to the Commerce Department s License Exception Consumer Communications Device (CCD) authorization or commodities or software used to develop software exported or reexported to Cuba pursuant to the Commerce Department s License Exception Support for the Cuban People (SCP) is permitted. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.578.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; [09-06-2019]



786. Is  peering  an arrangement of traffic exchange between internet networks  authorized by the CACR?

Yes. For example, a U.S. company could enter into a peering arrangement with ETECSA, the Cuban telecommunications provider, for the provision of internet services. See § 515.542(b). [09-06-2019]



787. Are services related to caching, such as the provision of data storage systems that reduce internet network traffic, authorized by the CACR?

Yes. Section 515.578 authorizes the exportation or reexportation to Cuba of services incident to the exchange of communications over the internet. To the extent data caching services are incident to such exchanges of communications, the provision of such services is authorized. Section 515.578 also authorizes the exportation of services, including business consulting and information technology management services that are related to certain consumer communications devices. For instance, the provision by an internet or telecommunications provider of caching services related to items exported to Cuba pursuant to Commerce License Exception Consumer Communications Devices (CCD) or an individual license issued by Commerce is authorized. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.578. [11-08-2017]



788. What type(s) of business arrangements are telecommunications and internet-based service providers that are subject to U.S. jurisdiction authorized to establish in Cuba?

Section 515.573 of the CACR contains a general license that authorizes certain persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, including telecommunications and internet-based service providers, to establish a physical and business presence in Cuba to provide authorized telecommunications and internet-based services. A business presence may include subsidiaries, branches, offices, joint ventures, franchises, and agency or other business relationships with any Cuban individual or entity (including ETECSA) and a physical presence may include leasing physical premises, including an office, warehouse, classroom, or retail outlet. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.573. [09-06-2019]



789. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction who open an authorized business or physical presence, such as a joint venture, office, or retail outlet, in Cuba market their telecommunications or internet-based services?

Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction that are providers of telecommunications or internet-based services who establish a business or physical presence in Cuba pursuant to the authorization in 31 CFR § 515.573 are authorized to engage in marketing related to that business or physical presence. [11-08-2017]



790. Are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction engaging in authorized transactions permitted to enter into arrangements with Cuban state-owned entities, such as ETECSA?

Individuals or entities subject to U.S. jurisdiction engaging in authorized transactions, either pursuant to a general or specific license, may engage with Cuban state-owned entities as authorized by the OFAC license. For example, a U.S. company engaging in authorized telecommunications-related transactions pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.542, such as payment for activation, installation, usage, roaming, maintenance, or termination fees, may engage directly with the Cuban state-owned telecommunications company, ETECSA, for these authorized purposes. [11-08-2017]


VIII. Third Country Effects


791. Are Cuban nationals located outside of Cuba still considered blocked?

Yes, but any individual Cuban national who can establish that he or she has taken up permanent residence outside of Cuba and otherwise meets the requirements set forth in 31 CFR § 515.505 is generally licensed as an unblocked national. Additionally all persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are authorized to provide goods and services to Cuban national individuals located outside of Cuba, provided there is no commercial exportation of goods or services to or from Cuba. Individuals subject to U.S. jurisdiction who are located in a third country may also receive or obtain services from a Cuban national that are ordinarily incident to travel and maintenance within that country. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.585. [11-08-2017]



792. Can U.S.-owned or -controlled entities in third countries engage in trade/commerce with Cuban nationals located outside of Cuba?

U.S.-owned or -controlled entities in third countries may provide goods and services to a Cuban national located outside of Cuba, provided that the transaction does not involve a commercial exportation, directly or indirectly, of goods or services to or from Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.585.

Other general licenses may authorize persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, including U.S.-owned or -controlled entities in third countries, to engage in certain specified transactions with Cuban nationals that involve the commercial exportation of services to Cuba. For example, 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(5) authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide certain civil aviation safety-related services to Cuba or to Cuban nationals, wherever located. [11-08-2017]



793. Are persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction authorized to provide financial services to Cuban nationals located outside of Cuba?

Yes. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction may provide financial services to a Cuban national located outside of Cuba who is an individual, provided that the transaction does not involve a commercial exportation, directly or indirectly, of goods or services to or from Cuba. Additionally, banking institutions are authorized to open and maintain accounts, including the deposit of funds in such accounts by wire transfer, for such Cuban nationals provided that the accounts are used only while the Cuban national is located outside of Cuba and the account is not used for transactions involving a commercial exportation, directly or indirectly, of goods or services to or from Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.585. [11-08-2017]


IX. Miscellaneous


794. What types of grants or awards in which Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest are authorized for persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide?

Section 515.590 of the CACR authorizes the provision of certain grants, scholarships, or awards to Cuban nationals or in which Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest. Such grants, scholarships, or awards must relate to educational activities, certain humanitarian projects (as set forth in § 515.575 (b)), scientific research, or religious activities. In accordance with NSPM-5, OFAC amended this general license to exclude from the authorization direct financial transactions with entities and subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.590. [09-06-2019]



795. Can a grant authorized pursuant to the CACR be awarded to a Cuban state-owned entity?

Section 515.590 of the CACR authorizes the provision of grants, scholarships, or awards to a Cuban national, including a Cuban state-owned entity provided that entity is not included on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List, and as long as any such grant, scholarship, or award is related to educational activities, humanitarian projects (as set forth in § 515.575(b)), scientific research, or religious activities. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.590. [11-08-2017]



796. Are specific licenses still required for transactions relative to the administration of a Cuban estate?

Section 515.523 of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations authorizes all transactions incident to the administration and distribution of the assets of a blocked estate of a decedent. All property distributed pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.523 is unblocked, provided that neither Cuba nor a Cuban national (other than the decedent or a person unblocked pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.505) has an interest in the property. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.523.
Furthermore, funds deposited in a blocked account in a banking institution in the United States held in the name of, or in which the beneficial interest is held by, a national of Cuba as a result of a valid testamentary disposition, intestate succession, or payment from a life insurance policy or annuity contract triggered by the death of the policyholder or contract holder may be remitted to the national of Cuba pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.570(g). For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.570(g).

Please note, effective November 26, 2020, 31 CFR § 515.570 no longer authorizes any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving an entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. [10-26-2020]



797. What types of projects would fall within the authorization in 31 CFR § 515.575 for microfinancing projects?

Among other things, the provision for microfinancing projects in section 515.575 of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) authorizes the provision of certain financial services to unemployed, underemployed, and low-income Cubans who have little or no access to conventional banks or comparable resources, and which may include a limited return on investment. In addition, section 515.570(g)(1) of the CACR authorizes remittances to individuals and independent non-governmental entities in Cuba to support authorized microfinancing projects. These provisions would authorize, for example, relatively limited contributions of funds to support individual entrepreneurs in sectors that need access to working capital, investment loans, insurance, or training in order to start or expand their operations. Please note, effective November 26, 2020, 31 CFR § 515.570 no longer authorizes any transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving any entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Further, 31 CFR § 515.575 and 31 CFR § 515.570(g)(1) do not authorize loans, extensions of credit or other financing related to transactions involving confiscated property the claim to which is owned by a U.S. national, which are prohibited by 31 CFR § 515.208. For additional guidance or fact-specific questions, we encourage you to contact OFAC. [10-26-2020]



798. If a person had applied for a specific license from OFAC before the CACR was revised but now believes that the proposed activity is authorized pursuant to a general license, does that person need to wait for his or her specific license application to be adjudicated

No. If persons meet the qualifications listed in the general license, then they do not need to wait for an official determination from OFAC regarding their specific license application. Persons who have determined they may proceed under a general license may wish to contact OFAC Licensing to withdraw existing applications. [11-08-2017]



799. Is a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction allowed to purchase or lease real property in Cuba?

Generally no, a person subject to U.S. jurisdiction is not authorized to purchase or lease real property in Cuba. The CACR prohibit any person subject to U.S. jurisdiction from purchasing or leasing property in Cuba unless authorized by OFAC.

Section 515.573 of the CACR authorizes certain entities subject to U.S. jurisdiction to establish a physical and/or business presence in Cuba to conduct authorized activities. The purchase or lease of real property in Cuba by such entities incident to their establishment of such physical or business presence is authorized. Additionally, employees of such entities authorized by § 515.573(a)(4) of the CACR to establish domicile in Cuba may purchase or lease residential property for use while domiciled in Cuba. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.573.

Authorized travelers to Cuba may lease property in Cuba as accommodations for the duration of their stay in Cuba. See 31 CFR § 515.560(c). This authorization is limited to the period of time when the traveler is in Cuba for authorized travel and does not permit the traveler to retain the property upon departure from Cuba.

Transactions related to the purchase or lease of real property in Cuba remain subject to the prohibitions in 31 CFR § 515.208. [11-08-2017]



800. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction import Cuban-origin pharmaceuticals into the United States?

Section 515.547(b) of the CACR authorizes all transactions incident to obtaining approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of Cuban-origin pharmaceuticals. The general license includes discovery and development, pre-clinical research, clinical research, regulatory review, regulatory approval and licensing, regulatory post-market activities, and the importation into the United States of Cuban-origin pharmaceuticals. Section 515.547(c) of the CACR authorizes the importation into the United States, and the marketing, sale, or other distribution in the United States, of FDA-approved Cuban-origin pharmaceuticals. For a complete description of what these general licenses authorize and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.547. Those engaging in the aforementioned activities may still need to secure regulatory approvals from other concerned U.S. government agencies, particularly the FDA. [09-06-2019]



801. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction provide services to Cuba or the Cuban government to support infrastructure maintenance and development in Cuba?

Section 515.591 of the CACR authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide Cuba or Cuban nationals (including the Cuban government and state-owned entities) with services related to developing, repairing, maintaining, and enhancing Cuban infrastructure that directly benefit the Cuban people, consistent with the export or reexport licensing policy of the Department of Commerce.  Infrastructure in this case means systems and assets used to provide the Cuban people with goods and services produced by the public transportation, water management, waste management, non-nuclear electricity generation, and electricity distribution sectors, as well as hospitals, public housing, and primary and secondary schools. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.591. [09-06-2019]


802. May persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction provide mail or parcel delivery services to Cuba or Cuban nationals?
With respect to the receipt or transmission of mail and parcels between the United States and Cuba, Section 515.542(a) of the CACR authorizes persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction to engage in all transactions, including payments, incident to such activities, provided that the importation or exportation of such mail and parcels is exempt from or authorized by the CACR. For a complete description of what this general license authorizes and the restrictions that apply, see 31 CFR § 515.542(a).

This general license does not authorize transactions incident to the receipt of transmission of mail and parcels between third countries and Cuba, or involving Cuban nationals in third countries. To the extent that such mail or parcels contain information or informational materials, as defined in 31 CFR § 515.332, transactions incident to their receipt or transmission are exempt pursuant to 31 CFR § 515.206 or authorized by 31 CFR § 515.545(a). Additionally, the provision of mail or parcel delivery services to a Cuban national who is an individual located in a third country is authorized by 31 CFR § 515.585(a), provided that the transaction does not involve a commercial export of goods or services to Cuba.&nbsp;[09-06-2019]&nbsp;



837.&nbsp;What did the September 24, 2020 amendment to the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) do?

Effective September 24, 2020, OFAC issued an amendment to the CACR restricting imports of Cuban-origin alcohol and tobacco products, as well as specific categories of authorized travel to Cuba related to professional meetings or conferences and certain public performances or other events, and also incorporating a new prohibition related to lodging in Cuba. Specifically, the September 24, 2020&nbsp;amendment makes the following changes to the CACR:

Restrictions on lodging, paying for lodging, or making reservations for lodging at certain properties in Cuba. &nbsp;Incorporates a prohibition in § 515.210, which prohibits any person subject to U.S. jurisdiction from lodging, paying for lodging, or making any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property that the Secretary of State has identified as a property in Cuba that is owned or controlled by the Cuban government; a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, as defined in § 515.337; a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, as defined in § 515.338; a close relative, as defined in § 515.339, of a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, or a close relative of a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party. In furtherance of this change, the State Department is creating a new list, the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List, to publish the names, addresses, or other identifying details, as relevant, of properties identified as meeting such criteria. For more on section § 515.210, please see FAQ 838.
	Restrictions on importation into the United States of Cuban-origin alcohol and tobacco products. &nbsp;Amends four authorizations in the CACR to exclude the importation into the United States of Cuban-origin alcohol and tobacco products. See 31 CFR §§ 515.560(c)(3); 515.569; 515.571(a)(1); and 515.585(d). Previously, the importation of Cuban-origin alcohol and tobacco products as accompanied baggage was authorized for non-commercial use under certain circumstances; with this amendment, OFAC is eliminating those authorizations. For more information, please see FAQ 731.
	Professional research and professional meetings in Cuba. &nbsp;Eliminates the general authorization in § 515.564(a)(2) related to attendance at, or organization of, professional meetings or conferences in Cuba. Persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction are no longer authorized via this general license to attend or organize professional meetings or conferences in Cuba. As a result, the only remaining general license in § 515.564(a) will be the general license for certain professional research in Cuba. In addition, OFAC is clarifying that specific licenses may be issued on a case-by-case basis authorizing certain transactions related to professional research or professional meetings or conferences. For more information, please see FAQ 701.&nbsp;
	Public performances, clinics, workshops, athletic and other competitions, and exhibitions. &nbsp;Eliminates the general authorization in § 515.567(b) related to public performances, clinics, workshops, competitions, and exhibitions. As a result, the only remaining general license for participation in and organization of athletic competitions in Cuba will be the general license in § 515.567(a) for athletic competitions by amateur or semi-professional athletes or athletic teams. In addition, OFAC is clarifying that specific licenses may be issued on a case-by-case basis authorizing certain activity. For more information, please see FAQ 706.
Please note that the Cuba embargo remains in place, and most transactions between Cuba and the United States, or persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction, continue to be prohibited under the CACR, which are enforced by OFAC. [09-23-2020]



838.&nbsp;What is the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List and how do I know if I am authorized to lodge or pay for lodging at a property in Cuba?

No person subject to U.S. jurisdiction may lodge, pay for lodging, or make any reservation for or on behalf of a third party to lodge, at any property that the Secretary of State has identified as a property in Cuba that is owned or controlled by: &nbsp;the Cuban government; a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, as defined in § 515.337; a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, as defined in § 515.338; a close relative, as defined in § 515.339, of a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba; or a close relative of a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party when the terms of the general or specific license expressly exclude such a transaction. &nbsp;Such properties are identified on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List. See FAQ 839&nbsp;for travel arrangements initiated prior to a property’s listing on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. [09-23-2020]



839.&nbsp;Are authorized travelers who have initiated travel arrangements prior to the addition of a property on the State Department’s Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List required to cancel their Cuba-related travel plans if their travel arrangements involve lodging at a listed property?

Consistent with the Administration’s interest in avoiding negative impacts on Americans for arranging lawful travel to Cuba, any existing travel-related arrangements that include lodging at properties in Cuba identified on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List will continue to be permitted, provided that those travel-related arrangements were initiated prior to the State Department’s addition of the property to the list as published in the Federal Register. Once the State Department publishes notice in the Federal Register that it has added the property to the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List, new lodging-related transactions with the property prohibited by § 515.210, such as a reservation on behalf of a third party to lodge at a property on the Cuba Prohibited Accommodations List, are prohibited, unless authorized by OFAC or exempt. For a complete description of the scope of this prohibition, see 31 CFR § 515.210. [09-23-2020]



852.&nbsp;What did the October 27, 2020 amendment to the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) do?

On October 27, 2020, OFAC issued an amendment to the CACR, effective November 26, 2020, to remove from the scope of certain remittance-related general authorizations any transactions involving entities or subentities identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List. Specifically, the October 27, 2020 rule amends the following general licenses: (i) 31 CFR § 515.570, relating to remittances from persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction or from blocked accounts; (ii) 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(3), relating to the provision of remittance forwarding services; and (iii) 31 CFR § 515.587, relating to remittances from Cuban nationals to persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction. For more information, see 31 CFR §§ 515.570, 515.572, and 515.587.

Further, the October 27, 2020 rule amends 31 CFR § 515.421 to clarify that a transaction relating to the collection, forwarding, or receipt of remittances involving an entity or subentity identified on the State Department’s Cuba Restricted List is not authorized as an ordinarily incident transaction where the terms of the general or specific license expressly exclude any such transactions (see, e.g., 31 CFR § 515.570(j), 31 CFR § 515.572(a)(3), or 31 CFR § 515.587). For more information, see 31 CFR § 515.421. OFAC also added a clarifying note in 31 CFR § 515.209, consistent with the amended text of 31 CFR § 515.421. As a result of these amendments, effective November 26, 2020, persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction will no longer be authorized to process remittances to or from Cuba through FINCIMEX or any other entity or subentity on the Cuba Restricted List. [10-26-2020]




Cyber-related Sanctions: Blocking the Property of Certain Persons Engaging in Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled Activities (Executive Order 13694), as amended


444. How will Treasury decide whom to sanction under this authority?

Executive Order (E.O.) 13694, as amended on December 29, 2016, focuses on specific harms caused by significant malicious cyber-enabled activities, and directs the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Secretary of State, to impose sanctions on those persons he determines to be responsible for or complicit in activities leading to such harms. Acting pursuant to delegated authority, Treasury s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) works in coordination with other U.S. government agencies to identify individuals and entities whose conduct meets the criteria set forth in E.O. 13694, as amended, and designate them for sanctions. Persons designated under this authority are added to OFAC s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List).

E.O. 13694, as amended, is intended to address situations where, for jurisdictional or other issues, certain significant malicious cyber actors may be beyond the reach of other authorities available to the U.S. government. [12-29-2016]



445. What are my compliance obligations with respect to E.O. 13694, as amended?

As with many of the sanctions programs that Treasury administers, U.S. persons (and persons otherwise subject to OFAC jurisdiction) must ensure that they are not engaging in trade or other transactions with persons named on OFAC s SDN List pursuant to E.O. 13694, as amended, or any entity owned by such persons.

As a general matter, U.S. persons, including firms that facilitate or engage in online commerce, are responsible for ensuring that they do not engage in unauthorized transactions or dealings with persons named on any of OFAC s sanctions lists or operate in jurisdictions targeted by comprehensive sanctions programs. Such persons, including technology companies, should develop a tailored, risk-based compliance program, which may include sanctions list screening or other appropriate measures. An adequate compliance solution will depend on a variety of factors, including the type of business involved, and there is no single compliance program or solution suitable for every circumstance.

The names of, and identifying information for, all individuals and entities included on OFAC s sanctions lists may be located via OFAC s free, online search engine at the following URL:https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/. In addition, OFAC offers text and PDF versions of these lists for manual review and a number of data file versions of its lists that are designed to facilitate automated screening. Depending on the scale, sophistication, and risk profile of your business, you may consider one of the numerous commercially available screening software packages. [12-29-2016]



447. What will significant malicious  cyber-enabled activities mean for the purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13694?

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define  cyber-enabled activities to include any act that is primarily accomplished through or facilitated by computers or other electronic devices. For purposes of E.O. 13694, malicious cyber-enabled activities include deliberate activities accomplished through unauthorized access to a computer system, including by remote access; circumventing one or more protection measures, including by bypassing a firewall; or compromising the security of hardware or software in the supply chain. These activities are often the means through which the specific harms enumerated in the E.O. are achieved, including compromise to critical infrastructure, denial of service attacks, or massive loss of sensitive information, such as trade secrets and personal financial information.

E.O. 13694 is tailored to address cyber-enabled activities that are reasonably likely to result in, or have materially contributed to, a significant threat to the national security, foreign policy, or economic health or financial stability of the United States. As this language indicates, it is intended to counter the most significant cyber threats that we face, whether they target our critical infrastructure, our companies, our citizens, or our economic health or financial stability. [04-01-2015]



448. I conduct cyber-related activities for legitimate educational, network defense, or research purposes only. Am I vulnerable to the application of sanctions under this authority for these activities?

The measures in this order are directed against significant malicious cyber-enabled activities that have the purpose or effect of causing specific enumerated harms, and are not designed to prevent or interfere with legitimate cyber-enabled academic, business, or non-profit activities. The U.S. government supports efforts by researchers, cybersecurity experts, and network defense specialists to identify, respond to, and repair vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors.

Similarly, these measures are not intended to target persons engaged in legitimate activities to ensure and promote the security of information systems, such as penetration testing and other methodologies, or to prevent or interfere with legitimate cyber-enabled activities undertaken to further academic research or commercial innovation as part of computer security-oriented conventions, competitions, or similar  good faith events. [04-01-2015]



449. I administer a network for my employer and I regularly deny access to certain services and systems (e.g., retail websites, social media platforms) in order to ensure the performance of the network for authorized business activities. Could I or my employer be sanctioned for this?

The measures in this order are designed to address the threat posed by individuals and entities engaged in significant malicious cyber-enabled activities that have the purpose or effect of causing specific enumerated harms. These measures are not designed to prevent or interfere with legitimate network defense or maintenance activities performed by computer security experts and companies as part of the normal course of business on their own systems, or systems they are otherwise authorized to manage. [04-01-2015]



450. Will Treasury impose sanctions on persons whose personal computers (or other networked electronic devices) are, without their knowledge or consent, used in malicious cyber-enabled activities (e.g., in denial-of-service attacks against U.S. financial institutions)?

No. These sanctions are designed to target those actors whose malicious cyber-enabled conduct is reasonably likely to result in, or have materially contributed to, a significant threat to the national security, foreign policy, or economic health or financial stability of the United States. These measures are not intended to target victims of such activities, including the unwitting owners of compromised computers.

For more information about best practices for securing home networks and engaging in responsible online behavior, visit the Department of Homeland Security s website at OnGuardOnline.gov. [04-01-2015]



451. How do financial sanctions relate to existing legal authorities in this context?

The United States whole-of-government strategy to combat cyber threats draws from a broad range of tools and authorities to respond to the growing and evolving threat posed by malicious cyber actors. Similar to our approach to global threats from terrorists, narcotics traffickers, and transnational criminal organizations, we will use financial sanctions in the fight against malicious cyber actors as a complement to existing tools, including diplomatic outreach and law enforcement authorities. [04-01-2015]



452. Are these sanctions consistent with international obligations?

As with all financial sanctions programs Treasury administers, these measures will be implemented in accordance with domestic law and our international obligations. [04-01-2015]



489. The President has amended E.O. 13694 to cover  misappropriation of information. What does that term mean? Does that mean that Treasury will impose sanctions related to the publication of information by American whistleblowers or members of the press?

No. This authority does not target American whistleblower activity or constitutionally protected activity. The E.O. defines misappropriation to be the  taking or obtaining by improper means, without permission or consent, or under false pretenses. Importantly, to be eligible for sanctions under this provision, an individual or entity must not only  misappropriate information, but it must also do so with the purpose or effect of interfering with or undermining election processes or institutions. [12-29-2016]


The Designation of the Federal Security Service and Cyber General License 1A,  Authorizing Certain Transactions with the Federal Security Service

501. What does General License 1A (GL 1A),  Authorizing Certain Transactions with the Federal Security Service, authorize?

GL 1A authorizes transactions with the Federal Security Service (a.k.a. Federalnaya Sluzhba Bezopasnosti) (a.k.a. FSB) that are necessary and ordinarily incident to requesting, receiving, utilizing, paying for, or dealing in certain licenses and authorizations for the importation, distribution, or use of certain information technology products in the Russian Federation.&nbsp; It also authorizes transactions necessary and ordinarily incident to compliance with rules and regulations administered by, and certain actions or investigations involving, the FSB.

This general license does not authorize U.S. persons to engage in transactions with the FSB except for the limited purposes described above, nor does it authorize the exportation, reexportation, or provision of any goods, technology, or services to the Crimea region of Ukraine.

A prior version of this general license was issued on February 2, 2017 (GL 1).&nbsp; On March 15, 2018, GL 1 was amended and reissued as GL 1A to ensure the scope of activities already authorized with respect to the FSB is not affected by the designation of the FSB under Section 224 of the Countering America s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA).&nbsp; The changes to GL 1 are limited to adding CAATSA authorities.&nbsp; GL 1A replaces and supersedes GL 1 effective March 15, 2018.&nbsp; [03-15-2018]


502. What sanctions remain in place on the FSB following the issuance of GL 1A?

GL 1A only authorizes certain transactions with the FSB acting in its administrative and law enforcement capacities.&nbsp; The GL was issued in order to ensure that U.S. persons engaging in certain business activities in Russia that are not otherwise prohibited are not unduly impacted.&nbsp; All other transactions involving any property subject to U.S. jurisdiction or within the possession or control of U.S. persons in which the FSB has an interest, including all other transactions directly or indirectly with the FSB, remain prohibited unless exempt or otherwise authorized by OFAC. [03-15-2018]



503. Does GL 1A authorize the exportation of hardware or software directly to the FSB, or where the FSB is the end user of such hardware and software?

No. GL 1A does not authorize the export of any goods, technology, or services directly or indirectly to the FSB or any other blocked person or entity, except for the limited purposes of complying with certain rules, regulations, and investigations involving the FSB or requesting certain licenses or authorizations for the importation, distribution, or use of information technology products in the Russian Federation. [03-15-2018]




504. I understand that travel to Russia involves clearing Russian border control, which is part of the FSB.&nbsp; Do I need a license from OFAC to travel to Russia, or to clear Russian customs?

No, the sanctions on the FSB do not apply to transactions by U.S. persons that are ordinarily incident to travel to or from Russia, including those transactions required to enter into or exit the country (i.e., complying with Russian border control requirements). [03-15-2018]




646. How do I block digital currency?&nbsp;

Once it has been determined that your institution is holding digital currency that is required to be blocked pursuant to OFAC s regulations, you must ensure that access to that digital currency is denied to the blocked person and that your institution complies with OFAC regulations related to blocked assets. &nbsp;Institutions may choose, for example, to block each digital currency wallet associated with the digital currency addresses that OFAC has identified as being associated with blocked persons, or opt to use its own wallet to consolidate wallets that contain the blocked digital currency (similar to an omnibus account) titled, for example,  Blocked SDN Digital Currency. &nbsp;Each of these methods is satisfactory, so long as there is an audit trail that will allow the digital currency to be unblocked only when the legal prohibition requiring the blocking of the digital currency ceases to apply. &nbsp;The institution is not obligated to convert the blocked digital currency into [traditional] fiat currency (e.g., U.S. dollars).&nbsp; Blocked digital currency must be reported to OFAC within 10 business days. &nbsp;Questions about whether a transaction should be blocked should be directed to OFAC at 202-622-2490 or mailto: ofac_feedback@treasury.gov. [11-28-2018]




647. Should an institution tell its customer that it blocked access to their digital currency and, if so, how does the institution explain it to the customer?

An institution may notify its customer that it has blocked digital currency pursuant to OFAC regulations. &nbsp;The customer has the right to apply for the unblocking and release of the digital currency.

To apply online to have the virtual currency released, please go to OFAC s online application page. [11-28-2018]








Somalia Sanctions: Private Relief Efforts



129. Can I make a private donation to a charity that is delivering humanitarian assistance in Somalia?

Yes. Please visit USAID s website for more information about how you can help. [08-04-2011]



130. Can my organization provide humanitarian assistance in Somalia?

Yes, non-governmental organizations may provide humanitarian assistance in Somalia without the need for a license from OFAC. Organizations considering entering Somali territory to conduct assistance operations should be aware that areas of Somalia are extremely unstable and dangerous, and should review the State Department s Travel Warning for Somalia. Among the most powerful armed groups operating in Somalia is al-Shabaab, a Specially Designated Global Terrorist and a Foreign Terrorist Organization under U.S. law. U.S. persons should exercise caution not to provide funds or material support to this organization or other designated groups. [08-04-2011]



131. What if, in delivering humanitarian assistance, my organization unintentionally provides food or medicine to members of al-Shabaab?

Due to the dangerous and highly unstable environment combined with urgent humanitarian needs in south and central Somalia, some food and/or medicine delivered in these areas may end up in the hands of al-Shabaab members. Such incidental benefits are not a focus for OFAC sanctions enforcement. [08-04-2011]



132. What if, in delivering humanitarian assistance, my organization unintentionally provides cash to members of al-Shabaab?

U.S. persons should be extremely cautious in making cash payments in areas under the control of al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab has, in the past, demanded  taxes and  access payments from assistance organizations. To the extent that such a payment is made unintentionally by an organization in the conduct of its assistance activities, where the organization did not have reason to know that it was dealing with al-Shabaab, that activity would not be a focus for OFAC sanctions enforcement. To the extent that an organization is facing demands for large or repeated payments in al-Shabaab-controlled areas, it should consult with OFAC prior to proceeding with its operations. [08-04-2011]



133. I have heard that certain U.S. humanitarian assistance organizations are exempted from the prohibition on making certain cash payments to al-Shabaab. Is that correct?

Under the current extreme circumstances on the ground, the Department of State and USAID and their contractors and grantees are authorized to engage in certain transactions in the conduct of their official assistance activities in Somalia, under rigorous controls aimed at preventing diversion of assistance or cash payments to designated parties.

Humanitarian assistance organizations that wish to apply for a contract or grant with the State Department or USAID should visit USAID s website. [08-04-2011]



134. I have family members or friends in Somalia and would like to send remittances to them. Can I do that without violating OFAC sanctions?

Yes, you can send remittances to Somalia, as long as the transactions do not involve parties listed on OFAC s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List.

For additional information on OFAC s Somalia-related sanctions programs, visit here. To request additional information from OFAC, please call the OFAC hotline at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490. [08-04-2011]




&nbsp;


Sudan, Darfur, and South Sudan-related Sanctions

&nbsp;



836.&nbsp;What sanctions remain applicable to Sudan and the Government of Sudan?

U.S. persons are no longer prohibited from engaging in transactions with respect to Sudan or the Government of Sudan that were previously prohibited by the Sudanese Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 538 (SSR). &nbsp;Effective October 12, 2017, sections 1 and 2 of Executive Order (E.O.) 13067 of November 3, 1997 and all of E.O. 13412 of October 13, 2006 were revoked, pursuant to E.O. 13761 of January 13, 2017, as amended by E.O. 13804 of July 11, 2017. &nbsp;To reflect this revocation of authorities, OFAC removed the SSR from the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) on June 29, 2018. &nbsp;

In addition, because the determination regarding Sudan as a State Sponsor of Terrorism was rescinded on December 14, 2020, Sudan is no longer subject to prohibitions under the Terrorism List Governments Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 596 (TLGSR), or section 906(a)(1) of the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (22 U.S.C. 7205).&nbsp;

However, the national emergency declared with respect to the Government of Sudan in E.O. 13067 remains in effect, as expanded upon in scope by subsequent E.O.s to include the violence in Sudan’s Darfur region. &nbsp;This national emergency provides the basis for OFAC’s sanctions on individuals and entities in connection with the conflict in Darfur, which were imposed pursuant to E.O. 13400 of April 26, 2006 and in part implement sanctions with respect to the conflict in Darfur adopted by the United Nations Security Council.

Additionally, while persons designated pursuant to the blocking authorities of E.O. 13067 or E.O. 13412 were removed from OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) due to the revocation of those sanctions authorities on October 12, 2017, Sudanese persons may still be designated or blocked pursuant to other sanctions authorities.

Note that the revocation of certain sanctions with respect to Sudan and the Government of Sudan does not affect past, present, or future OFAC enforcement investigations or actions associated with any apparent violations of the SSR that occurred prior to October 12, 2017 or of the TLGSR prior to December 14, 2020. [04-12-2021]&nbsp;



Executive Order 13664, &quot;Blocking Property of Certain Persons with Respect to South Sudan&quot;
368. Are humanitarian aid groups prohibited from making payments to or otherwise transacting with non-designated individuals or entities in South Sudan, including militias and armed groups under the command or control of a designated individual?


An entity in South Sudan that is commanded or controlled by an individual designated under Executive Order 13664 is not considered blocked by operation of law. Payments, including  taxes or  access payments, made to non-designated individuals or entities under the command or control of an individual designated under E.O. 13664 do not, in and of themselves, constitute prohibited activity. U.S. persons should employ due diligence, however, to ensure that an SDN is not, for example, profiting from such transactions. [06-02-2014]




Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) Registration Numbers for Activities in Sudan

57. Are Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) involved in humanitarian or religious activities in Sudan still required to obtain an NGO registration number

No. The general license at 31 C.F.R. § 538.540 authorizes all transactions prohibited under the Sudanese Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 538, effective January 17, 2017. As a result, NGOs are no longer required to obtain an NGO registration number to operate in or transact with Sudan. [01-13-2017]




Exports of Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices to Sudan
&nbsp;
Effective January 17, 2017, a specific license is not required to export or reexport agricultural commodities, medicines, or medical devices to Sudan, as such transactions are generally licensed pursuant to 31 C.F.R. § 538.540. For further information regarding exports and reexports of agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran and Sudan pursuant to the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (TSRA), please see the following topic.






&nbsp;


Assessing OFAC Name Matches


5. How do I determine if I have a valid OFAC match?

Please take the following  due diligence steps in determining a valid OFAC match.

If you are calling about a wire transfer or other  live transaction:

Step 1. Is the  hit or  match against OFAC s Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list, one of its other sanctions lists, or targeted countries, or is it  hitting for some other reason (i.e.,  Control List or  PEP,  CIA,  Non-Cooperative Countries and Territories,  Canadian Consolidated List (OSFI),  World Bank Debarred Parties,  Blocked Officials File, or  government official of a designated country ), or can you not tell what the  hit is?

If it s hitting against OFAC s SDN list, one of its other sanctions lists, or targeted countries, continue to 2 below.
	If it s hitting for some other reason, you should contact the  keeper of whichever other list the match is hitting against. For questions about:
	The Denied Persons List and the Entities List, please contact the Bureau of Industry and Security at the U.S. Department of Commerce at 202-482-4811.
	The FBI s Most Wanted List or any other FBI-issued watch list, please contact the Federal Bureau of Investigation (http://www.fbi.gov/contact/fo/fo.htm).
	The Debarred Parties list, please contact the Directorate of Defense Trade Controls at the U.S. Department of State, 202-663-1282.
	The Bank Secrecy Act and the USA PATRIOT Act, please contact the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), 1-800-949-2732.
	If you are unsure whom to contact, please contact your screening software provider which told you there was a  hit.
	If you can t tell what the  hit is, you should contact your screening software provider which told you there was a  hit.
Step 2. Now that you ve established that the hit is against one of OFAC s sanctions lists or targeted countries, you must evaluate the quality of the hit. Compare the name in your transactions with the name on the sanctions list. Is the name in your transaction an individual while the name on the sanctions list is a vessel, organization or company (or vice-versa)?

If yes, you do not have a valid match.*
	If no, please continue to 3 below.
Step 3. How much of the listed entry s name is matching against the name in your transaction? Is just one of two or more names matching (i.e., just the last name)?

If yes, you do not have a valid match.*
	If no, please continue to 4 below.
Step 4. Compare the complete sanctions list entry with all of the information you have on the matching name in your transaction. An entry often will have, for example, a full name, address, nationality, passport, tax ID or cedula number, place of birth, date of birth, former names and aliases. Are you missing a lot of this information for the name in your transaction?

If yes, go back and get more information and then compare your complete information against the entry.
	If no, please continue to 5 below.
Step 5. Are there a number of similarities or exact matches?

If yes, please call the hotline at 1-800-540-6322.
	If no, you do not have a valid match.*
If you are calling about an account:

Step 1. Is the  hit or  match against OFAC s SDN list, one of OFAC's other sanctions lists or targeted countries, or is it  hitting for some other reason (i.e.,  Control List or  PEP,  CIA,  Non-Cooperative Countries and Territories,  Canadian Consolidated List (OSFI),  World Bank Debarred Parties, or  government official of a designated country ), or can you not tell what the  hit is?

If it s hitting against one of OFAC s sanctions lists or targeted countries, continue to 2 below.
	If it s hitting for some other reason, you should contact the  keeper of whichever other list the match is hitting against. For questions about:
	The Denied Persons List and the Entities List, please contact the Bureau of Industry and Security at the U.S. Department of Commerce at 202-482-4811.
	The FBI s Most Wanted List or any other FBI-issued watch list, please contact the Federal Bureau of Investigation (http://www.fbi.gov/contact/fo/fo.htm).
	The Debarred Parties list, please contact the Directorate of Defense Trade Controls at the U.S. Department of State, 202-663-1282.
	The Bank Secrecy Act and the USA PATRIOT Act, please contact the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), 1-800-949-2732.
	If you are unsure whom to contact, you should contact your screening software provider which told you there was a  hit.
	If you can t tell what the  hit is, you should contact your screening software provider which told you there was a  hit.
Step 2. Now that you ve established that the hit is against one of OFAC s sanctions lists or targeted countries, you must evaluate the quality of the hit. Compare the name of your customer with the name on the sanctions list. Is the name of your customer an individual while the name on the sanctions list is a vessel, organization or company (or vice-versa)?

If yes, you do not have a valid match.*
	If no, please continue to 3 below.
Step 3. How much of the listed entry s name is matching against the name of your account holder? Is just one of two or more names matching (i.e., just the last name)?

If yes, you do not have a valid match.*
	If no, please continue to 4 below.
Step 4. Compare the complete entry with all of the information you have on the matching name of your account holder. An entry often will have, for example, a full name, address, nationality, passport, tax ID or cedula number, place of birth, date of birth, former names and aliases. Are you missing a lot of this information for the name of your account holder?

If yes, go back and get more information and then compare your complete information against the entry.
	If no, please continue to 5 below.
Step 5. Are there a number of similarities or exact matches?

If yes, please call the hotline at 1-800-540-6322.
	If no, you do not have a valid match.*
* If you have reason to know or believe that processing this transfer or operating this account would violate any of the Regulations, you must call the hotline and explain this knowledge or belief. [01-30-2015]



&nbsp;

Strong and Weak Aliases
For additional information regarding strong and weak aliases on OFAC's sanctions lists, please see the following topic.




&nbsp;


Starting an OFAC Compliance Program


25. Does OFAC itself require that banks set up a certain type of compliance program?

No. There is no single compliance program suitable for every financial institution. OFAC is not itself a bank regulator; its basic requirement is that financial institutions not violate the laws that it administers. Financial institutions should check with their regulators regarding the suitability of specific programs to their unique situations. [09-10-2002]



27. What do I need to do to comply? Do I have to buy expensive software?

This is primarily a question for your regulator. What constitutes an adequate compliance program depends in large part on who your customers are and what kinds of business you do. Certain areas of bank operations, such as international wire transfers and trade finance, are at a higher risk than others. There are numerous interdiction software packages that are commercially available. They vary considerably in cost and capabilities. If your bank feels it needs to invest in software in its attempt to comply with OFAC regulations, OFAC recommends that you talk to your counterparts in other banks about the systems they have in place and contact vendors for an assessment of your needs. It should be noted that *.TXT and *.PDF versions of all of OFAC's sanctions lists can be manually scanned; OFAC also offers a free, online search engine at the following URL: https://sdnsearch.ofac.treas.gov [01-30-2015]



28. How often do I need to scan my customer database against OFAC's sanctions lists?

The frequency of running an OFAC scan must be guided by your organization's internal policies and procedures. Keep in mind, however, that if your organization fails to identify and block a target account (of a terrorist, for example), there could be serious consequences such as a transfer of funds or other valuable property to an Specially Designated National, an enforcement action against your organization, and negative publicity. [01-30-2015]



29. How do I setup a compliance program for my bank?

There is no prepackaged compliance program that fits the needs of every bank. Banks, obviously, range in size from small to some of the largest institutions in the world. A good starting point is to go to the OFAC website and look under &quot;Regulations by Industry.&quot; Then read the brochure for the Financial Community. This brochure provides insight as to how your particular bank could set up a compliance program. There are also a number of articles written for banking industry publications available on OFAC's website. Banks should also review OFAC's Frequently Asked Questions, its SDN and other sanctions list pages and finally, OFAC's dedicated sanctions program pages. It may be helpful to contact your counterparts in other banks to see what they are doing and talk to your regulator. [01-30-2015]



30. How do I know if my compliance program is adequate?

The following information will provide you with areas to consider as you review your OFAC procedures. [09-10-2002]



31. What are the features and benefits that banks should be looking for when selecting an OFAC compliance software package?

There are a wide variety of software packages available to the financial community. The size and needs of each institution help to determine what to look for in a package. Some packages are used to interdict sanctioned countries and names on the Specially Designated Nationals or other sanctions lists in wire transfers. Others are used to check the names of new customers or to routinely filter the names of all account holders. One suggestion for finding the right software for your bank is to research what your peer banks are using and determine if the software package is working for them. Your bank also could talk to a variety of software vendors who can easily be located by doing an Internet search. [01-30-2015]




&nbsp;


Blocking and Rejecting Transactions


32. How do I block an account or a funds transfer?

Once it has been determined that funds need to be blocked, they must be placed into an interest-bearing account on your books from which only OFAC-authorized debits may be made. The blocking also must be reported to OFAC Compliance within 10 business days. Some banks have opted to open separate accounts for each blocked transaction, while others have opted for omnibus accounts titled, for example, &quot;Blocked Libyan Funds.&quot; Either method is satisfactory, so long as there is an audit trail which will allow specific funds to be unblocked with interest at any point in the future. [09-10-2002]



33. How much interest do I have to pay on the blocked funds?

OFAC regulations require that funds earn interest at a commercially reasonable rate, i.e., at a rate currently offered to other depositors on deposits or instruments of comparable size and maturity. [09-10-2002]



34. Can my bank deduct service charges from the account?

Generally yes. In most cases (excluding Iraq, for instance) OFAC regulations contain provisions to allow a bank to debit blocked accounts for normal service charges, which are described in each set of regulations. The charges must be in accordance with a published rate schedule for the type of account in which the funds are maintained. [09-10-2002]



35. Do all OFAC programs involve blocking transactions?

No. OFAC regulations are tailored to further the requirements and purposes of specific Executive Orders or statutes which provide the basic outline of each program. In some cases, the President has determined that a comprehensive asset freeze is appropriate, and in others the President has determined that more limited restrictions (for example, import bans) are in order. The individual program web pages outline the restrictions for each program. Special attention should be given when reviewing sanctions list targets that are included on one of OFAC's non-Specially Designated Nationals sanctions lists. [01-30-2015]



36.&nbsp;I understand blocking a transaction, but what is meant by rejecting a transaction?&nbsp; When should a transaction be rejected rather than blocked?

In some cases, an underlying transaction may be prohibited, but there is no blockable interest (i.e., that of a Specially Designated National (SDN) or blocked person or government) in the transaction.&nbsp; In these cases, the transaction is simply rejected, or not processed and returned to the originator.&nbsp;

For example, a U.S. financial institution would have to reject a wire transfer between two third-country companies (non-SDNs) involving an export to a company in Iran that is not otherwise subject to sanctions.&nbsp; Since there is no interest of the blocked person (e.g., the Government of Iran, and Iranian financial institution, or an SDN), there is no blockable interest in the funds.&nbsp; However, the U.S. financial institution cannot process the transaction because that would constitute a prohibited export of services to Iran pursuant to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR), unless authorized by OFAC or exempt from regulation.&nbsp; Similarly, a U.S. financial institution is prohibited under the ITSR from an engaging in trade-related transactions or dealings with Iran, including financing a prohibited transaction.&nbsp; A U.S. financial institution cannot so much as advise a letter of credit if the underlying transaction is in violation of OFAC regulations.&nbsp; In addition, U.S. persons are prohibited from facilitating transactions by foreign persons that would be prohibited if performed by a U.S. person.

&nbsp;

The following examples may help illustrate which transactions should be blocked and which should be rejected.

&nbsp;


	A U.S. financial institution interdicts a commercial payment destined for the account of XYZ Import-Export Co. at the Bank of XYZ in Iran.&nbsp; The Bank of XYZ is an Iranian financial institution and wholly-owned by the Government of Iran; accordingly, Bank of XYZ is blocked under section 560.211 of the ITSR.&nbsp; This payment must be blocked.
	
	
	A U.S. financial institution interdicts a commercial payment destined for ABC Import-Export in Tehran, Iran.&nbsp; Unlike the Bank of XYZ, ABC Import-Export in Tehran is not a blocked person, so there is no blockable interest in this payment.&nbsp; However, processing the payment would mean facilitating trade with Iran, exporting a service to Iran, and engaging in trade-related transactions with Iran; therefore, the U.S. financial institution must reject the payment.
	
Blocked and rejected transactions must be reported to OFAC within 10 days (see 31 C.F.R. §§ 501.603 and 501.604).&nbsp; Questions about whether a transaction should be blocked or rejected should be directed to OFAC s Sanctions Compliance &amp; Evaluation Division at OFACReport@treasury.gov. [08-11-2020]



39. What do I do if I have a blocked account that needs to be escheated to the state?

You need to discuss this with your state authorities and with OFAC. For instance, the state of New York has a license to escheat blocked funds, pending OFAC approval of each transfer. Banks in New York should contact the State Banking Department for instructions on how to proceed. Banks in other states should contact OFAC directly for instructions on how to proceed. [09-10-2002]



41. Should an institution tell its customer that it blocked their funds, and, if so, how does the institution explain it to them?

An institution may notify its customer that it has blocked funds in accordance with OFAC's instructions. The customer has the right to apply for the unblocking and release of the funds.

To apply online to have the funds released, please go to our online application page. [3-16 -2015]



42.&nbsp;What do I do if a person tries to open an account and the individual or entity s name is on OFAC s SDN List (or is otherwise a blocked person)?&nbsp; Do I open the account and then block the funds?

A U.S. financial institution, its foreign branches, and  in some cases  its wholly-owned or -controlled foreign subsidiaries, cannot open an account for a person named on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) or a person who is otherwise blocked (e.g., a blocked government or an entity that is subject to the 50 Percent Rule ).&nbsp; This is a prohibited service.&nbsp; However, the institution or its affiliates should pay careful attention to ensure the person trying to open the account is the same person as the one named on OFAC s SDN List or is otherwise subject to blocking.&nbsp; In many cases, an institution may identify a  false positive, where the name is similar to a sanctioned person s name, but the rest of the information provided by the applicant does not match the descriptor information on OFAC s SDN List.&nbsp; If a U.S. financial institution does come into the possession or control of any property in which a blocked person has an interest, the U.S. financial institution is obligated to block that property.&nbsp; In other words, if you receive an application to open an account from a person who matches the information on the SDN List, together with an opening deposit, you are obligated to block the funds.&nbsp; The same is true for other banking transactions.&nbsp; If, for example, a customer asks if he or she is allowed to send money to a relative s account with Bank of XYZ, which appears on the SDN List, the bank can say  no, that s illegal. &nbsp; If, on the other hand, a bank receives instructions from its customer to debit his or her account and send the funds to Bank of XYZ, the bank must act on the instructions by blocking the funds that contain a future interest of the SDN bank.&nbsp; You might think of the analogy of a bouncing ball.&nbsp; Once the ball starts moving, you must stop it if it comes into your possession. [08-11-2020]



48. I just received an interdiction &quot;alert.&quot; What do I do?

When your interdiction software or account holder checking service shows a potential match, OFAC recommends that you do an initial analysis prior to contacting OFAC. If you have a reasonably close match to a name on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list (or one of OFAC's other sanctions lists) and your customer is located in the same vicinity as the SDN, feel free to contact OFAC. Computer software may flag some transactions that are not actually associated with OFAC targets. This is where human intervention becomes critical and some hands-on research may be necessary. Please look at the following &quot;due dilligence&quot; steps before calling OFAC. Unless you have an exact match or are otherwise privy to information indicating that the hit is a sanctions target, it is recommended that you do not actually block a transaction without discussing the matter with OFAC. [01-30-2015]



53. How do I differentiate between an &quot;inquiry&quot; and a &quot;payment instruction&quot; when a customer wants to send a wire transfer to a sanctioned party or country?

In those programs with blocking provisions, OFAC's regulations block all &quot;property&quot; in which a target has an interest. The term &quot;property&quot; is very broadly defined, including present, future or contingent interests. In the case of a wire transfer, the bank will be holding blocked property upon the receipt of concrete instructions from its customer to send the funds. In this case, the funds must be blocked and reported to OFAC within ten days. If, on the other hand, a customer simply asks &quot;Can I send money to Cuba?&quot; there is no blockable interest in the inquiry and the bank can answer the question or direct the customer to OFAC. The same logic applies to cases where the transaction would be required to be rejected under OFAC regulations. There is not technically a &quot;reject&quot; item until the bank receives instructions from its customer to debit its account and send the funds. [01-15-2015]




&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Filing Reports with OFAC


49. If I reject or block a transaction, when do I have to report the action to OFAC? How do I submit the report?

31 C.F.R. Parts §§501.603 and 501.604 require blocking and reject reports to be submitted to OFAC within 10 business days of the date of the action. Optional reporting forms are available at this link and complete information may be emailed to OFAC s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division at ofacreport@treasury.gov. Blocking and reject reports must contain a copy of the original transfer instructions. [07-28-2017]



50. Is there a requirement for annual reporting of blocked property? Is there a required format?

Yes. A report of blocked property is to be submitted annually by September 30 to OFAC Compliance, Department of the Treasury, Washington, D.C., 20220. The standardized form can be accessed by visiting this link. If you wish to use a different format, please contact OFAC's Compliance Division at 202-622-2490. For&nbsp;Guidance on Filing the Annual Report of Blocked Property, visit this link. [06-30-2017]



819. Is the June 21, 2019 amendment to the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) s Reporting, Procedures and Penalties Regulations in effect? Am I required to comply with all requirements of the amended regulations?

Yes, effective June 21, 2019, OFAC amended the Reporting, Procedures and Penalties Regulations, 31 CFR part 501 (RPPR), to provide updated instructions and incorporate new requirements for parties filing reports on blocked property, unblocked property, or rejected transactions. In addition, this rule includes information regarding OFAC s electronic license application procedures and provides additional instructions regarding applications for the release of blocked funds.

OFAC expects all U.S. persons and persons otherwise subject to U.S. jurisdiction, including parties that are not U.S. financial institutions, to comply fully with all requirements of this rule, including the expanded requirement in Section 501.604 of the RPPR to provide reports to OFAC regarding rejected transactions within 10 business days of the rejected transaction. (Previously, only U.S. financial institutions were required to submit reports to OFAC for rejected funds transfers.) Reports on rejected transactions are to be submitted to OFAC, preferably electronically, as specified by OFAC s Reporting and License Application Forms webpage. 

OFAC accepted comments from the public on this rule, which it continues to review. In addition, OFAC welcomes further feedback as we assess whether any clarification or modification to the rule is appropriate, including: additional information regarding the business impact of this rule; examples of rejected transactions that are proving challenging to report; the quantity of rejected transactions; and the types of information in the filer s possession for a rejected transaction report. Feedback and questions regarding the rule should be submitted to OFAC s Compliance Division by email at: OFAC_Feedback@treasury.gov. [02-20-2020]



820. I am required to submit a rejected transaction report to OFAC, but I do not have all the information that is required to be reported pursuant to 31 CFR § 501.604(b). Am I required to collect such information from my counterparty just to complete my rejected transaction report?

OFAC expects U.S. persons and persons otherwise subject to U.S. jurisdiction to provide all information required by Section 501.604(b) of the RPPR  that is in the filer s possession in a rejected transaction report, and generally does not expect reporters to seek further information from their counterparty solely to obtain additional information required to be reported under Section 501.604(b). However, OFAC would expect at a minimum that all rejected transaction reports include required information that is applicable in all reject scenarios (e.g., information regarding the submitter of the report, the date the transaction was rejected, the legal authority or authorities under which the transaction was rejected, and any relevant documentation received in connection with the transaction).&nbsp;[02-20-2020]






Compliance for Internet, Web Based Activities, and Personal Communications


72. Can I send money to a sanctioned country using a third-country company s website? Can I buy gifts for someone in a sanctioned country over the internet? The websites tell me that it s ok because they themselves are not sanctioned parties.

You cannot do something indirectly that you would not be able to do directly. Therefore, these sites can be used to facilitate authorized transactions, but you cannot use them to perform a transaction which would be in violation of U.S. law. For example, the Cuban Assets Control Regulations (CACR) authorize any U.S. person to send $1,000 per quarter to close relatives in Cuba, provided that the recipient is not a prohibited official of the Government of Cuba, as defined in § 515.337 or a prohibited member of the Cuban Communist Party, as defined in § 515.338, or a close relative of such persons, as defined in § 515.339. See 31 CFR § 515.570(a) and (j) for additional applicable conditions. Subject to those conditions, the U.S. remitter can use a third-country provider to send these funds to Cuba. If the person attempts to send more than $1000 per quarter to any one individual, however, he or she may be in violation of U.S. law and subject to penalties. Another example is booking unauthorized travel to Cuba using an internet travel service provider in a third country. Spending money on unauthorized travel-related transactions involving Cuba is prohibited by the CACR, regardless of how the travel is booked or how it is paid for. The fact that the trip was booked through a third-country company, either in person or over the internet, is irrelevant. [10-26-2020]



73. My company provides money remittance and account services via the Internet. Does OFAC have any compliance guidance for this type of business?

Complying with United States sanctions policy presents unique challenges to institutions that operate exclusively on the Internet. The Internet has often been thought of as an &quot;anonymous venue&quot; in that e-commerce transactions can be conducted in relative privacy with little or no face-to-face contact among the parties in a transaction. This anonymity creates a significant challenge for Internet businesses that wish to satisfy their due diligence requirements.

In order to be compliant with OFAC-governed sanctions regulations, US jurisdiction entities must ensure that they are not:

A. Engaging in trade or transaction activities that violate the regulations behind OFAC s country-based sanctions programs, and;

B. Engaging in trade or transaction activities with sanctions targets named on OFAC's list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN's).

A number of Internet-based financial service companies already developed Internet Protocol (IP) address blocking procedures. These companies use publicly available data to maintain tables of IP addresses based on geographic region. Users attempting to initiate an online transaction or access an account from a sanctioned country are blocked based on their IP address. While this approach is effective, it does not fully address an Internet firm s compliance risks. The fact that international distribution authorities can reassign IP blocks makes the geographic location of an IP potentially dynamic.

The anonymous character of Internet-based transactions often places obstacles in the path of rigorous compliance practices. Firms that facilitate or engage in e-commerce should do their best to know their customers directly. In order to minimize their liabilities, Internet remittance and account service firms should attempt to gather authentic identification information on their customers before a new account is opened or new transaction is initiated. This information will help confirm the customer s identity and help the e-commerce firm ensure it is not conducting business with a sanctions target. Currently many Internet remittance companies use credit card authentication as the primary method of confirming a customer's identity. While this method is technologically expedient, it does not meet the standards of due diligence normally found in the non-Internet-based financial community. A company cannot rely on another firm s compliance program in order to mitigate risk.

It is recommended that e-commerce firms gather and record &quot;purpose of payment&quot; information on each transaction they process. In the non-Internet sector, financial institutions are able to stop in-process transactions and gather more information on them. Due to the level of automation found within the Internet financial sector, this type of in-process information gathering is not always possible. Collecting information on the purpose of payments up front will allow Internet firms to better screen outgoing and incoming transactions for potential violations. [04-13-2004]



Cyber-related Sanctions and Executive Orders 13694 and&nbsp;13757
&nbsp;
For information regarding Cyber-related Sanctions and Executive Orders 13694 and 13757, please see the following topic.




&nbsp;


Specific Software, Hardware, and Services Covered by General License D-1 for Iran and 31 CFR § 538.533 for Sudan (the &quot;Personal Communications General Licenses&quot;)
Effective January 17, 2017, the general license under the Sudanese Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 538 (SSR), authorizing the exportation, reexportation, or provision of certain services, software, and hardware incident to personal communications, 31 C.F.R. § 538.533, has been superseded by a broader general license under the SSR that authorizes all transactions prohibited under the SSR. See 31 C.F.R. § 538.540. As a result, for such exports and reexports to Sudan, U.S. persons may rely on the broader authorization in § 538.540 and do not need to abide by the narrower requirements of § 538.533. Section 538.540 only authorizes transactions prohibited under the SSR and does not affect Iran General License D-1.



434. Are all applications designed to run on mobile operating systems ( apps ) covered by the Personal Communications GLs?

The exportation to Iran and Sudan of apps that are designated EAR99 or classified under export control classification number (ECCN) 5D992.c, as specified in category (8) of the Annex to GL D-1 and in Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, is authorized under the Personal Communications GLs, including apps downloaded via online app stores. [02-17-2015]



435. Is the exportation of anti-virus, anti-malware, anti-tracking, and anti-censorship software authorized?

Yes. Paragraphs (a)(3) of GL D-1 and § 538.533 authorize the exportation of certain anti-virus, anti-malware, anti-tracking, and anti-censorship software, as specified in categories (6), (7), and (9) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively. [02-17-2015]



436. What do Secure Socket Layers (SSLs), listed in the Annex to GL D-1 and in Appendix A to § 538.533, encompass?

SSLs, as described in category (11) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, encompass  provisioning and verification software for Secure Socket Layer (SSL) certificates designated EAR99 or classified under ECCN 5D992.c, and services necessary for the operation of such software. Additional provisioning and verification software not subject to the EAR may be included under the Personal Communications GLs authorization for, in relevant part, software not subject to the EAR that is exported or reexported, directly or indirectly, by a U.S. person located outside the United States, that is of a type described in the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, provided that it would be eligible for classification under an ECCN listed in the Annex or Appendix (here, ECCN 5D992.c), or designated as EAR99, if it were subject to the EAR. [02-17-2015]



437. Are mobile phone accessories and computer accessories and peripherals authorized for export under the Personal Communications GLs?

Yes. Accessories for use in conjunction with hardware specified in categories (1) and (5) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, and peripherals for use in conjunction with hardware specified in category (5) of the same are authorized for export to Iran and Sudan under the Personal Communications GLs. Authorized accessories for mobile phones include headsets, cases, holsters, mounts, chargers, docks, display protectors, cables, adapters, and batteries. Authorized accessories for computers include keyboards and mice; authorized peripherals for computers include consumer disk drives and other data storage devices. As set forth in a note to the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, for the purposes of the Annex and Appendix, the term  consumer refers to items that are: (1) generally available to the public by being sold, without restriction, from stock at retail selling points by means of any of the following: (a) over-the-counter transactions; (b) mail order transactions; (c) electronic transactions; or (d) telephone call transactions; and (2) designed for installation by the user without further substantial support by the supplier. [02-17-2015]



438. Is the exportation of parts or components for authorized hardware, such as microprocessors, authorized under the Personal Communications GLs?

No. While the exportation of certain accessories and peripherals specified in categories (1) and (5) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, is authorized under paragraphs (a)(3) of the Personal Communications GLs, the exportation of hardware parts or components is not. Requests for specific licenses to export parts or components, including replacement parts, will be considered on a case-by-case basis. [02-17-2015]



439. Do the Personal Communications GLs authorize the export of bundled software that includes both software authorized by the Personal Communications GLs and software that is not authorized by the Personal Communications GLs?

No. To qualify for the Personal Communications GLs, all individual software items in a bundled package must fall within one of the Personal Communications GL authorizations. If some software in a bundled package is authorized by the Personal Communications GLs, but other software is not, the portion of the software falling outside the authorizations in the Personal Communications GLs would need to be otherwise exempt or authorized or would require a specific license for export. For example, a bundle of software that included exclusively software authorized by GL D-1 and by 31 CFR § 560.540 could be exported. [02-17-2015]



440. Do the Personal Communications GLs authorize the exportation to Iran and Sudan of fee-based desktop publishing software and productivity software suites used to publish documents, presentations, spreadsheets, charts, music, movies, and digital images?

Yes. Fee-based desktop publishing software and productivity software suites have been determined to fall within the scope of fee-based software necessary to enable services incident to the exchange of personal communications as described in paragraphs (a)(2) of the Personal Communications GLs, provided that the software meets the additional criteria in those paragraphs (e.g., for software subject to the EAR, the software is designated EAR99 or is classified by the U.S. Department of Commerce on the Commerce Control List, 15 CFR part 774, supplement No. 1 ( CCL ) under ECCN 5D992.c). By contrast, enterprise management software has been determined not to fall within the scope of fee-based software necessary to enable services incident to the exchange of personal communications as described in paragraphs (a)(2) of the Personal Communications GLs. [02-17-2015]



441. Do the Personal Communications GLs authorize the exportation of fee-based cloud computing services to Iran and Sudan

Yes. Paragraphs (a)(1) of the Personal Communications GLs authorize the exportation to Iran and Sudan of fee-based cloud computing services incident to the exchange of personal communications over the Internet. In addition, paragraphs (a)(2)(i) and (a)(3) authorize software necessary to enable such services, provided that such software is designated EAR99 or classified by the U.S. Department of Commerce on the CCL under ECCN 5D992.c or, in the case of software that is not subject to the EAR, would be designated EAR99 if it were located in the United States or would meet the criteria for classification under ECCN 5D992.c if it were subject to the EAR. [02-17-2015]



442. For purposes of category (5) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, what would be considered  software required for effective consumer use of personal computing devices, laptops, and tablets?

 Software required for effective consumer use consists of software essential to the operation of the hardware listed in category (5) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, including, for example, drivers and patches. Operating systems are separately authorized in category (5) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533. [02-17-2015]



443. What are  residential consumer satellite terminals and transceiver equipment?

Satellite terminals and other equipment listed in category (4) of the Annex to GL D-1 and Appendix A to § 538.533, respectively, shall be deemed  residential consumer if the equipment is designated EAR99 or classified under ECCN 5A992.c, 5A991.b.2, or 5A991.b.4 or, in the case of equipment that is not subject to the EAR, would be designated EAR99 if it were located in the United States or would meet the criteria for classification under ECCN 5A992.c, 5A991.b.2, or 5A991.b.4 if it were subject to the EAR. [02-17-2015]&nbsp;







Compliance for the Insurance Industry


61. State insurance statutes regulate an insurer's ability to withhold claim payments, cancel policies or to decline to enter into policies. In some cases, insurers must commit an ostensible violation of state insurance regulations to comply with OFAC regulations. Does OFAC have a position as to whether OFAC regulations preempt state insurance regulations in this context?

OFAC's regulations under the Trading with the Enemy Act and the International Emergency Economic Powers Act are based on Presidential declarations of national emergency and preempt state insurance regulations. OFAC regulations are not federal insurance regulations, they are regulations promulgated under the President's exercise of foreign-affairs and national emergency powers. [09-10-2002]



62. At what point must an insurer check to determine whether an applicant for a policy is a Specially Designated National (SDN) or is on one of OFAC's other sanctions lists?

If you receive an application from an SDN for a policy, you are under an obligation not to issue the policy. Remember that when you are insuring someone, you are providing a service to that person. You are not allowed to provide any services to an SDN. If the SDN sends a deposit along with the application, you must block the payment. If you receive an application from a party on one of OFAC's other sanctions lists, please review the specific treatment prohibitions associated with that list carefully before taking any action. [09-10-2002]



63. What should an insurer do if it discovers that a policyholder is or becomes a Specially Designated National (SDN)--cancel the policy, void the policy ab initio, non-renew the policy, refuse to pay claims under the policy? Should the claim be paid under a policy issued to an SDN if the payment is to an innocent third-party (for example, the injured party in an automobile accident)?

The first thing an insurance company should do upon discovery of such a policy is to contact OFAC Compliance. OFAC will work with you on the specifics of the case. It is possible a license could be issued to allow the receipt of premium payments to keep the policy in force. Although it is unlikely that a payment would be licensed to an SDN, it is possible that a payment would be allowed to an innocent third party. The important thing to remember is that the policy itself is a blocked contract and all dealings with it must involve OFAC. [09-10-2002]



64. A workers' compensation policy is with the employer, not the employee. Is it permissible for an insurer to maintain a workers compensation policy that would cover a person on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List, since the insurer is not transacting business with the SDN, but only with his/her employer?

If an insurer knows that a person covered under the group policy is an SDN, that person s coverage is blocked, and if he or she makes a claim under the policy, the claim cannot be paid. If an insurer does not know the names of those covered under a group policy, it would have no reason to know it needed to block anything unless and until an SDN files a claim under that policy. At that point its blocking requirement would kick in.

If an insurer knows that a person covered under a group policy is on one of OFAC's other sanctions lists, a different set of restrictions may apply. The insurer should contact OFAC if a claim is filed by an individual on one of the other sanctions lists. [01-30-2015]



65. How frequently is an insurer expected to scrub its databases for OFAC compliance?

That is up to your firm and your regulator. Remember that a critical aspect of the designation of a Specially Designated National (SDN) is that the SDN's assets must be frozen immediately, before they can be removed from U.S. jurisdiction. If a firm only scrubs its database quarterly, it could be 3 months too late in freezing targeted assets. Although the prohibitions and treatments for individuals and entities on OFAC's other sanctions lists are different from those on the SDN list, there may be similar consequences if your firm takes a long time in recognizing a sanctions list match.

OFAC's sanctions lists may be updated as frequently as a few times a week or as rarely as once in a month. [01-30-2015]



66. Is it sufficient if my company screens life insurance policies only prior to policy issuance?

That is up to your firm and your regulators. Conducting screening only before policy issuance is critical but would not likely achieve your desired level of compliance. After the policy issuance, the U.S. Government may designate an existing policyholder or a named beneficiary as a Specially Designated National or Blocked Person (&quot;SDN&quot;), or it may expand sanctions with respect to a particular country, or impose sanctions against a new country. If an existing policyholder or a named beneficiary became an SDN or otherwise subject to U.S. sanctions, the insurer may be required to &quot;block&quot; the policy, report such blocking to OFAC within 10 days of the SDN designation, place any future premiums into a blocked, interest-bearing account at a U.S. financial institution, and seek an OFAC license before making any payments under the policy. Other restrictions may apply if a policyholder or a named beneficiary is added to one of OFAC's other sanctions lists. Consequently, routinely screening all policies against OFAC s sanctions lists, as frequently updated, would enable the insurer to comply with the applicable OFAC regulatory requirements. It also is important to screen the policyholder and beneficiary prior to paying a claim. [01-30-2015]



68. If my screening efforts uncover a policyholder who became a Specially Designated National after policy issuance, can I notify the policyholder that the policy is &quot;blocked&quot;?

Yes, the insurer may notify the policyholder that the policy is blocked, without obtaining a specific license from OFAC. [05-01-2003]



69. In my letter to the policyholder whose policy is &quot;blocked,&quot; may I also instruct the policyholder not to send any more premium or that we will not accept additional premium under this account?

The insurer may instruct the policyholder as follows: &quot;If you send any more premium, we are required under applicable U.S. laws and regulations to place such funds in a blocked account. If you have any questions, please contact the U.S. Department of Treasury s Office of Foreign Assets Control.&quot; [05-01-2003]



102. How can an insurer participate in worldwide insurance markets through global insurance policies if, by definition, coverage extends to potential risks in sanctioned countries?

The best and most reliable approach for insuring global risks without violating U.S. sanctions law is to insert in global insurance policies an explicit exclusion for risks that would violate U.S. sanctions law. For example, the following standard exclusion clause is often used in open marine cargo policies to avoid OFAC compliance problems: &quot;whenever coverage provided by this policy would be in violation of any U.S. economic or trade sanctions, such coverage shall be null and void.&quot; The legal effect of this exclusion is to prevent the extension of a prohibited service (insurance or risk assumption) to sanctioned countries, entities or individuals. It essentially shifts the risk of loss for the underlying transaction back to the insured - the person more likely to have direct control over the economic activity giving rise to the contact with a sanctioned country, entity or individual. [11-16-2007]



103. What if the commercial setting and/or market circumstances of a global insurance policy does not permit the use of an OFAC exclusion such as the one noted above?

OFAC recognizes that U.S. insurers often compete in international markets where non-U.S. insurers are willing and able to issue global insurance policies without a U.S. sanctions exclusion. In cases where such an exclusion is not commercially feasible, the insurer should apply for a specific OFAC license for the global insurance policy. In making a licensing determination, OFAC will review the facts and circumstances of each global insurance policy, including both risk frequency and risk severity, to assure that issuance of the policy will not undermine U.S. foreign policy goals. A separate license would be required for the insurer to pay claims arising under any authorized global insurance policy. [11-16-2007]



104. Can an insurer offer global travel insurance and worldwide travel assistance without violating U.S. sanctions?

The provision of all travel related services are authorized for all OFAC country sanctions programs (including Burma, Iran and Sudan) except Cuba. Travel related services may only be provided in Cuba pursuant to a valid general or specific OFAC license. If the traveler is a U.S. person traveling to Cuba pursuant to a valid OFAC license, travel insurance may be issued to the traveler by a U.S. insurer without a separate license. Similarly, the issuance or provision of coverage for global health, life, or travel insurance policies for individuals ordinarily resident in a country outside of Cuba who travel to or within Cuba is authorized by general license, as is the servicing of such policies and payment of claim arising from events that occurred while the individual was traveling in, or to or from, Cuba. Additionally, insurers should check OFAC s list of Specially Designated Nationals and other sanctions lists to ensure that no prohibited services are rendered to persons or entities on those lists. [01-15-2015]



Sanctions Relating to Insurance, Reinsurance, or Underwriting and the Iran Freedom And Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012
For additional information regarding insurance, reinsurance, and underwriting activities in Iran, please see the following topic.

&nbsp;




Additional Questions from Financial Institutions


40. If my financial institution receives a wire going to an embassy in a sanctioned country, can we process the transaction?

This depends on the program. If you have a payment involving an embassy in a targeted country, please contact OFAC Compliance for directions (1-800-540-6322). [09-10-2002]



43. Does a financial institution need to scan names against OFAC's list of targets upon account opening or can it wait for 24 hours to receive a report from its software vendor on whether or not there is a hit?

There is no legal or regulatory requirement to use software or to scan. There is a requirement, however, not to violate the law by doing business with a target or failing to block property. OFAC realizes that financial institutions use software that does not always provide an instantaneous response and may require some analysis to determine if a customer is indeed on OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals List (or any of OFAC's other sanctions lists). The important thing is not to conclude transactions before the analysis is completed. [09-10-2002]



44. Is there a dollar limit on which transactions are subject to OFAC regulations?

There is no minimum or maximum amount subject to the regulations. [09-10-2002]



45. Does my bank need to check the OFAC list when selling cashier's checks and money orders? In the case of cashier's checks, do I need to check both the purchaser and the payee? As a mortgage lender, do I need to check both the purchaser and the seller's name against the Specially Designated Nationals list? Do I need to check their names against all of OFAC's other sanctions lists?

Every transaction that a U.S. financial institution engages in is subject to OFAC regulations. If a bank knows or has reason to know that a target is party to a transaction, the bank's processing of the transaction would be unlawful. [09-10-2002]



46. If a loan meets underwriting standards but is a true &quot;hit&quot; on OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list, what do we use as a denial reason on the adverse action notice?

If you have confirmed with OFAC that you have a &quot;good hit&quot; on the SDN list or one of OFAC's other sanctions lists, there is no reason not to explain that to the customer. The customer can contact OFAC directly for further information. [09-10-2002]



47. Through corporate giving programs, many banks contribute toward charities and other non-profits. To what extent does a bank need to review the recipients of these gifts or the principals of the charities?

Donations to charitable institutions must be handled as any other financial transaction. The donating bank or institution should crosscheck the recipient names against OFAC's sanctions lists and assure that the donations are in compliance with OFAC sanctions programs. [09-10-2002]



52. Can U.S. financial institutions open correspondent accounts for Iraqi financial institutions, or process funds transfers to and from Iraqi financial institutions?

Yes, U.S. financial institutions are authorized to open correspondent accounts for, and process funds transfer to or on behalf of Iraqi financial institutions. [07-27-2004]



95. Does a financial institution have the obligation to screen account beneficiaries for compliance with OFAC regulations?

&quot;Property,&quot; as defined in OFAC regulations, includes most products that financial institutions offer to their clients. &quot;Property interest,&quot; as defined by OFAC, includes any interest whatsoever, direct or indirect, present, future or contingent. Given these definitions and as a matter of sound banking practice, it is prudent for financial institutions to screen account beneficiaries upon account opening, while updating account information, when performing periodic screening and, most definitely, upon disbursing funds. Where there is a property interest of a sanctions target under a blocking program, the property must be blocked. Beneficiaries include, but are not limited to, trustees, children, spouses, non-spouses, entities and powers of attorney. [12-04-2006]



116. On February 14, 2008, OFAC issued guidance stating that the property and interests in property of an entity are blocked if the entity is owned, directly or indirectly, 50% or more by a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to an Executive Order or regulations administered by OFAC. We act as an intermediary bank in wire transfers between other banks. Does OFAC expect banks that are acting as financial intermediaries to research non-account parties that do not appear on the SDN List, but are involved with or referenced in transactions that are processed on behalf of correspondents?

A wire transfer in which an entity has an interest is blocked property if the entity is 50% or more owned by a person whose property and interests in property are blocked. This is true even in instances where such a transaction is passing through a U.S. bank that (1) is operating solely as an intermediary, (2) does not have any direct relationship with the entity (e.g., the entity is a non-account party), and (3) does not know or have reason to know the entity s ownership or other information demonstrating the blocked status of the entity s property. In instances where all three conditions are met, notwithstanding the blocked status of the wire transfer, OFAC would not expect the bank to research the non-account parties listed in the wire transfer that do not appear on the SDN List and, accordingly, would not pursue an enforcement action against the bank for having processed such a transaction.

If a bank handling a wire transfer currently has information in its possession leading the bank to know or have reason to know that a particular individual or entity involved with or referenced in the wire transfer is subject to blocking, then the bank will be held responsible if it does not take appropriate steps to ensure that the wire transfer is blocked.

OFAC expects banks to conduct due diligence on their own direct customers (including, for example, their ownership structure) to confirm that those customers are not persons whose property and interests in property are blocked.

With regard to other types of transactions where a bank is acting solely as an intermediary and fails to block transactions involving a sanctions target, OFAC will consider the totality of the circumstances surrounding the bank s processing of the transaction, including the factors listed above, to determine what, if any, enforcement action to take against the bank. [01-15-2015]



Securities Industry
335. Firms operating in the securities industry as custodians and securities intermediaries often face the question of how to accurately identify the beneficial owner of assets within an account or transaction. What can these firms do to protect themselves from the risk of directly or indirectly providing services to or dealing in property in which there is an ownership or other interest of parties subject to sanctions?

OFAC encourages firms operating in the securities industry, including securities intermediaries and custodians, to implement measures that mitigate the risk of providing services to, or dealing in property in which there is an ownership or other interest of, parties subject to U.S. sanctions. Such measures should be tailored to and commensurate with the sanctions risk posed by a firm s business activities. Best practices include:


	Making customers aware of the firm s U.S. sanctions compliance obligations and having customers agree in writing not to use their account(s) with the firm in a manner that could cause a violation of OFAC sanctions. Sanctions may be implicated when the United States is the jurisdiction of issuance or custody of an underlying security or when a U.S. person acts as a custodian or other service provider.
	
	
	Conducting due diligence, including through the use of questionnaires and certifications, to identify customers who do business in or with countries or persons subject to U.S. sanctions. Such customers may warrant enhanced due diligence because of an increased risk that they will use their accounts to hold assets or conduct transactions for third parties subject to sanctions.
	
	
	Imposing restrictions and heightened due diligence requirements on the use of certain products or services by customers who are judged to present a high risk from an OFAC sanctions perspective. Restrictions might include limitations on the use of omnibus accounts, where a lack of transparency can be exploited in order to circumvent OFAC regulations.
	
	
	Making efforts to understand the nature and purpose of non-proprietary accounts, including requiring information regarding third parties whose assets may be held in the accounts. Red flags may arise relating to geographic areas or the nesting of third-party assets.
	
	
	Monitoring accounts to detect unusual or suspicious activity  for example, unexplained significant changes in the value, volume, and types of assets within an account. These types of changes may indicate that a customer is facilitating new business for third parties that has not been vetted for possible sanctions implications. [01-23-2014]
	




Additional Iran-related Questions from Financial Institutions&nbsp;
&nbsp;
For additional information regarding Iran, please see the following topic.





Questions on Virtual Currency


559. For purposes of OFAC sanctions programs, what do the terms  virtual currency,  digital currency,  digital currency wallet, and  digital currency address mean?

Virtual currency is a digital representation of value that functions as (i) a medium of exchange; (ii) a unit of account; and/or (iii) a store of value; is neither issued nor guaranteed by any jurisdiction; and does not have legal tender status in any jurisdiction.

Digital currency includes sovereign cryptocurrency, virtual currency (non-fiat), and a digital representation of fiat currency.

A digital currency wallet is a software application (or other mechanism) that provides a means for holding, storing, and transferring digital currency. A wallet holds the user s digital currency addresses, which allow the user to receive digital currency, and private keys, which allow the user to transfer digital currency. The wallet also maintains the user s digital currency balance. A wallet provider is a person (individual or entity) that provides the software to create and manage wallets, which users can download. A hosted wallet provider is a business that creates and stores a digital currency wallet on behalf of a customer. Most hosted wallets also offer exchange and payments services to facilitate participation in a digital currency system by users.

A digital currency address is an alphanumeric identifier that represents a potential destination for a digital currency transfer. A digital currency address is associated with a digital currency wallet. [03-19-2018]



560. Are my OFAC compliance obligations the same, regardless of whether a transaction is denominated in digital currency or traditional fiat currency?

Yes, the obligations are the same. U.S. persons (and persons otherwise subject to OFAC jurisdiction) must ensure that they block the property and interests in property of persons named on OFAC s SDN List or any entity owned in the aggregate, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by one or more blocked persons, and that they do not engage in trade or other transactions with such persons.

As a general matter, U.S. persons and persons otherwise subject to OFAC jurisdiction, including firms that facilitate or engage in online commerce or process transactions using digital currency, are responsible for ensuring that they do not engage in unauthorized transactions prohibited by OFAC sanctions, such as dealings with blocked persons or property, or engaging in prohibited trade or investment-related transactions. Prohibited transactions include transactions that evade or avoid, have the purpose of evading or avoiding, cause a violation of, or attempt to violate prohibitions imposed by OFAC under various sanctions authorities. Additionally, persons that provide financial, material, or technological support for or to a designated person may be designated by OFAC under the relevant sanctions authority.

Persons including technology companies; administrators, exchangers, and users of digital currencies; and other payment processors should develop a tailored, risk-based compliance program, which generally should include sanctions list screening and other appropriate measures. An adequate compliance solution will depend on a variety of factors, including the type of business involved. There is no single compliance program or solution suitable for every circumstance. [03-19-2018]



561. How will OFAC use its existing authorities to sanction those who use digital currencies for illicit purposes?

The United States whole-of-government strategies to combat global threats such as terrorism, transnational organized crime, malicious cyber activity, narcotics trafficking, weapons of mass destruction (WMD) proliferation, and human rights abuses include targeting an array of activities, including the use of digital currencies or other emerging payment systems to conduct proscribed financial transactions and evade U.S. sanctions. The strategies draw from a broad range of tools and authorities to respond to the growing and evolving threat posed by malicious actors using new payment mechanisms. OFAC will use sanctions in the fight against criminal and other malicious actors abusing digital currencies and emerging payment systems as a complement to existing tools, including diplomatic outreach and law enforcement authorities. To strengthen our efforts to combat the illicit use of digital currency transactions under our existing authorities, OFAC may include as identifiers on the SDN List specific digital currency addresses associated with blocked persons. [03-19-2018]



562. How will OFAC identify digital currency-related information on the SDN List?

OFAC may add digital currency addresses to the SDN List to alert the public of specific digital currency identifiers associated with a blocked person. OFAC s digital currency address listings are not likely to be exhaustive. Parties who identify digital currency identifiers or wallets that they believe are owned by, or otherwise associated with, an SDN and hold such property should take the necessary steps to block the relevant digital currency and file a report with OFAC that includes information about the wallet s or address s ownership, and any other relevant details. [03-19-2018]



563. What is the structure of a digital currency address on OFAC s SDN List?

Digital currency addresses listed on the SDN List include their unique alphanumeric identifier (up to 256 characters) and identify the digital currency to which the address corresponds (e.g., Bitcoin (XBT), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC), Neo (NEO), Dash (DASH), Ripple (XRP), Iota (MIOTA), Monero (XMR), and Petro (PTR)). Each digital currency address listed on the SDN list will have its own field: the structure will always begin with  Digital Currency Address , followed by a dash and the digital currency s symbol (e.g.,  Digital Currency Address - XBT ,  Digital Currency Address - ETH ). This information is followed by the unique alphanumeric identifier of the specific address. [06-06-2018]



594. Is it possible to query a digital currency address using OFAC s Sanctions List Search tool?

No, it is not currently possible to query for digital currency addresses using OFAC s Sanctions List Search tool. Alternatively, OFAC's SDN List&nbsp;and other OFAC sanctions lists are available in a number of file formats and downloads, which can be used to identify and screen for listed digital currency addresses. Additional information on OFAC list file formats and downloads, can be accessed here. [06-06-2018]




646. How do I block digital currency?&nbsp;

Once it has been determined that your institution is holding digital currency that is required to be blocked pursuant to OFAC s regulations, you must ensure that access to that digital currency is denied to the blocked person and that your institution complies with OFAC regulations related to blocked assets. &nbsp;Institutions may choose, for example, to block each digital currency wallet associated with the digital currency addresses that OFAC has identified as being associated with blocked persons, or opt to use its own wallet to consolidate wallets that contain the blocked digital currency (similar to an omnibus account) titled, for example,  Blocked SDN Digital Currency. &nbsp;Each of these methods is satisfactory, so long as there is an audit trail that will allow the digital currency to be unblocked only when the legal prohibition requiring the blocking of the digital currency ceases to apply. &nbsp;The institution is not obligated to convert the blocked digital currency into traditional fiat currency (e.g., U.S. dollars).&nbsp; Blocked digital currency must be reported to OFAC within 10 business days. &nbsp;Questions about whether a transaction should be blocked should be directed to OFAC at 202-622-2490 or ofac_feedback@treasury.gov. [11-28-2018]




647. Should an institution tell its customer that it blocked access to their digital currency and, if so, how does the institution explain it to the customer?

An institution may notify its customer that it has blocked digital currency pursuant to OFAC regulations. &nbsp;The customer has the right to apply for the unblocking and release of the digital currency.

To apply online to have the virtual currency released, please go to OFAC s online application page. [11-28-2018]



&nbsp;





Specially Designated Nationals (SDNs) and the SDN List


18. What is an SDN?

As part of its enforcement efforts, OFAC publishes a list of individuals and companies owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, targeted countries. It also lists individuals, groups, and entities, such as terrorists and narcotics traffickers designated under programs that are not country-specific. Collectively, such individuals and companies are called &quot;Specially Designated Nationals&quot; or &quot;SDNs.&quot; Their assets are blocked and U.S. persons are generally prohibited from dealing with them. [09-10-2002]



19. How do I get a copy of the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List?

The best way to get the SDN list is from OFAC's website. The list is disseminated in a number of different formats, including XML and fixed field/delimited files that can be integrated into databases. [05-03-2018]



20. How often is the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List updated?

The SDN list is frequently updated. There is no predetermined timetable, but rather names are added or removed as necessary and appropriate. [09-10-2002]



21. How do I know what specific changes have been made to OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN)&nbsp;List?

All changes for the current calendar year are cumulatively available in a .PDF file and in a text version.&nbsp; The entire list may also be browsed&nbsp;using OFAC's Sanctions List Search Tool .&nbsp;&nbsp;Cumulative changes for prior years back to 1994 are also available in ASCII format by following this link. The same link will take you to a *.PDF version of the file for calendar years back to 2001. [05-03-2018]



23. What do I do if I have a match to the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) or one of OFAC's other sanctions lists?

If you have checked a name manually or by using software and find a match, you should do a little more research. Is it an exact name match, or very close? Is your customer located in the same general area as the SDN or another entry on one of OFAC's sanctions lists? If not, it may be a &quot;false hit.&quot; If there are many similarities, contact OFAC's &quot;hotline&quot; at 1-800-540-6322 for verification. If your &quot;hit&quot; concerns an in-process wire transfer, you may prefer to e-mail your question to OFAC. Unless a transaction involves an exact match, it is recommended that you contact OFAC Compliance before actually blocking assets. [09-10-2002]



466. How do I verify if a name was removed from one of OFAC s sanctions lists?&nbsp; How do I find the date a Specially Designated National (or other sanctions target) was added to, updated, or removed from an OFAC list?

For historical information about names that have been added to,&nbsp;updated, or&nbsp;removed from OFAC s Specially Designated Nationals List or one of OFAC s other sanctions lists, please see our Archive of Changes page. Designation, removal, and update information is organized chronologically by list and by year.

In addition, all changes to OFAC s lists are announced on OFAC s recent actions pages and OFAC maintains all of its recent actions records going back to 2001.&nbsp; Users can now search the entire collection of recent actions notices by using the search field at the top of this page. [04-18-2017]



56. What is the difference between the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List and the Commerce Department's List of Denied Parties? Why can't they be integrated into one list? What about OFAC's other sanctions lists?

SDNs are individuals and entities located throughout the world that are blocked pursuant to the various sanctions programs administered by OFAC. SDNs can be front companies, parastatal entities, or individuals determined to be owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, targeted countries or groups. They also can be specially identified individuals such as terrorists or narcotics traffickers. U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transactions with SDNs and must block any property in their possession or under their control in which an SDN has an interest. SDNs are designated primarily under the statutory authority of the Trading With the Enemy Act, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act and the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act. OFAC also administers several other sanctions lists including the Foreign Sanctions Evaders (FSE) List and the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) List. U.S. persons are not required to block the property of individuals and entities on these FSE and SSI lists (unless the targets are also on the SDN list), but other prohibitions and investment restrictions apply.

The Bureau of Industry and Security (&quot;BIS&quot;) of the U.S. Department of Commerce maintains separate lists for the purposes of the programs that it administers (including the Denied Persons List and the Entity List). The Denied Persons List consists of individuals and companies that have been denied export and reexport privileges by BIS. The Entity List consists of foreign end users who pose an unacceptable risk of diverting U.S. exports and the technology they contain to alternate destinations for the development of weapons of mass destruction. Accordingly, U.S. exports to those entities may require a license. Authority for the Denied Persons List and the Entity List can be found in Title 15, Part 764, Supplement No. 2 and Title 15, Part 744, Supplement No.4 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, respectively.

The foreign policy objectives and legal requirements of OFAC's lists are significantly different from those of the BIS lists. The unique goals of the OFAC and BIS programs preclude the creation of a combined OFAC and BIS list. [01-30-2015]

897.&nbsp;How can a person seek to be removed from an OFAC sanctions list?&nbsp;

Consistent with OFAC regulations, persons may seek to be removed from the&nbsp;Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List&nbsp;or&nbsp;Other OFAC Sanctions Lists. &nbsp;For information concerning the process for seeking such removal, please refer to OFAC’s&nbsp;Filing a Petition for Removal from an OFAC List&nbsp;webpage, which references the delisting petition procedures set forth at 31 C.F.R. § 501.807. &nbsp;The procedures set forth at 31 C.F.R. § 501.807 are available to any person seeking to be removed from any OFAC list, regardless of whether that person is a “blocked person” within the meaning of that rule. [06/02/2021]




&nbsp;


How to Search OFAC's Sanctions Lists

On October 10, 2014, OFAC upgraded Sanctions List Search to incorporate additional sanctions lists. The improved search tool employs fuzzy logic on its name search field to look for potential matches on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List and on its Consolidated Sanctions List. This consolidated list includes the Non-SDN, Palestinian Legislative Council List &quot;NS-PLC List&quot;, the&nbsp;List of Foreign Financial Institutions Subject to Correspondent Account or Payable-Through Account Sanctions,&nbsp;&quot;CAPTA List&quot;, the Non-SDN Iran Sanctions Act List &quot;NS-ISA List,&quot; the Foreign Sanctions Evaders List &quot;FSE List,&quot; and&nbsp;the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List &quot;SSI List&quot;. [04-08-2019]


82. Does OFAC have a web-based search engine for its sanctions lists?

Yes, OFAC does maintain its own web-based search service. It can be accessed at the following URL: https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/. [10-10-2014]



246. How does Sanctions List Search work?

In addition to returning results that are exact matches (when the match threshold slider bar is set to 100%), Sanctions List Search can also provide a broader set of results using fuzzy logic. This logic uses character and string matching as well as phonetic matching. Only the name field of Sanctions List Search invokes fuzzy logic when the tool is run. The other fields on the tool use character matching logic. Please click here for more information on what a true sanctions list match is. For more information on the slider bar, see FAQ 247.&nbsp;[04-28-2021]



247. What does the Sanctions List Search Score mean?

The score field indicates the similarity between the name entered and resulting matches on one of OFAC's sanctions lists. It is calculated using two matching logic algorithms: one based upon phonetics, and a second based upon the similarity of the characters in the two strings. The slider bar defaults to a score of 100, which indicates an exact match. Lower scores indicate potential matches. [04-28-2021]



248. How do I use the Minimum Name Score field and score slider bar?

The minimum name score field limits the number of names returned by the search. A value of 100 will return only names that exactly match the characters entered into the name field. A value of 50 will return all names that are deemed to be 50% similar based upon the matching logic of the search tool. By lowering the match threshold the system will return a broader result set. [02-05-2013]



249. How is the Score calculated?

Sanctions List Search will first look for potential matches based on the first letter of input search terms and by checking for matches at least 50% or more similar based on edit distance (edit distance is the minimum number of operations required to transform the input string of characters into the string that it is being compared to on the list). Sanctions List Search then uses two matching logic algorithms, and two matching logic techniques to calculate the score. The two algorithms are Jaro-Winkler, a string difference algorithm, and Soundex, a phonetic algorithm. The first technique involves using the Jaro-Winkler algorithm to compare the entire name string entered against full name strings of potential match entries on OFAC's sanctions lists. The second technique involves splitting the name string entered into multiple name parts (for example, John Doe would be split into two name parts). Each name part is then compared to name parts on all of OFAC's sanctions lists using the Jaro-Winkler and Soundex algorithms. The search calculates a score for each name part entered, and a composite score for all name parts entered. Sanctions List Search uses both techniques each time the search is run and returns the higher of the two scores in the Score column. [04-28-2021]



250. Does OFAC recommend a specific match threshold score?

OFAC cannot make such a recommendation because each search has its own unique set of facts surrounding it. Users of Sanctions List Search must make their own match threshold determinations based upon their own internal risk assessments and established compliance practices. [06-09-2014]



251. What fields influence the score?

Only the name field influences the score. [02-05-2013]



252. What fields use fuzzy logic?

Only the name field uses the fuzzy searching logic. [02-05-2013]



253. When conducting a search using the ID field, does Sanctions List Search account for variations in non-alphanumeric characters?

Sanctions List Search s ID field uses exact character matching to provide users with a result. In order to receive the broadest number of results, users should conduct ID field searches both with and without any non-alphanumeric characters. [06-09-2014]



287. Who may use Sanctions List Search? Can we configure our automated system to utilize Sanctions List Search on a continual basis?

Sanctions List Search is a free tool provided by OFAC to assist the public in complying with sanctions programs. It is intended to be used by individual users that are looking for potential matches on OFAC's sanctions lists. It should not be utilized by automated systems that are configured to continually run searches through the tool. For a copy of files that can be easily interpreted by automated systems and software programs, please see the list of XML, CSV, PIP, DEL, and FF files on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) and Consolidated Sanctions List pages. [10-10-2014]



369. Does Sanctions List Search look for potential matches on all of the various sanctions lists that OFAC has published on its website?

Sanctions List Search will look for and return potential matches from the&nbsp;&nbsp;Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) and Consolidated Sanctions Lists. The user can look under the List column to see which list(s) a potential match is on. Please see the Consolidated List page for more detailed information on what is included in the Consolidated List. [10-10-2014]



467. Does the Sanctions List Search tool show historic information? For example, does it show names that have been removed from one of OFAC's sanctions lists?

OFAC's Sanctions List Search is updated frequently and always contains the latest versions of OFAC's sanctions lists. Like OFAC's other list-related publications, Sanctions List Search does not contain historical information. Names that have been removed from OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN)&nbsp;or Consolidated Lists are not included in Sanctions List Search. Likewise, targets that have been updated only appear with their most up to date entry information. For historical information about a target on one of OFAC's sanctions lists, please see our archive page. [04-21-2016]



892. What is the difference between the previous version of Sanctions List Search, and the upgraded version made live to the public on January 25, 2021?

OFAC’s Sanctions List Search application has been available to the public since 2011. Over the years the tool’s userbase grew to a point where the original infrastructure and design for the application could not keep up with demand. In late 2020, OFAC took steps to increase the tool’s efficiency to improve its performance.

The primary update was the addition of a new algorithm to the tool’s fuzzy logic search functionality. The upgraded application still utilizes the original Soundex and Jaro-Winkler algorithms in addition to the new algorithm (see this link for more information on the upgrade). As a result of this update, users may see differences in search results when compared to an earlier version of the tool. If users had previously tested Sanctions List Search in order to determine how the tool could assist in their due diligence, it is recommended that such testing be repeated on the current version of the tool. OFAC may continue to periodically update and/or make changes to the tool. While OFAC has no immediate plans to further upgrade the application’s fuzzy logic functionality users should watch OFAC’s website for information about future upgrades. As such, users are to advised that they are using a free service at their own risk, and that best practice dictates each user performs baseline checks to see how updates/changes to the tool may affect search results.

For more information regarding how the tool works and calculates scores, please refer to FAQs 246, 247 and 249. For more information on who may use the tool, please see FAQ 287. [04-28-2021]




&nbsp;


Information on List File Formats and Downloads


79. Does OFAC provide its Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List in a format that can be easily imported into a database?

Yes. OFAC's SDN list is available in XML, fixed-field and delimited formats that can be imported into a variety of software programs. [12-19-2007]



80. Does OFAC provide its Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List in a spreadsheet format?

OFAC publishes the SDN data in a comma separated values format (CSV). This format is recognized by Excel and other spreadsheet programs and can be imported into spreadsheet format by simply opening the file in your default spreadsheet application. [06-14-2007]



422. How do I get a copy of one or more of OFAC s other sanctions lists (in addition to the Specially Designated Nationals list)?

OFAC maintains other sanctions lists in addition to its Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list. The names on these lists may also appear on the SDN list when such targets have a blocking provision associated with them. However, when the treatment of sanctions targets is unique and stops short of the blocking treatment, these names will appear on the one of OFAC's non-SDN lists. Links to the human-readable versions of these lists can be found here. Data versions of these lists are now being disseminated in a single, consolidated data file (known as the Consolidated Sanctions List). These data files can be found here. [02-02-2015]



81. What is the delimiter in OFAC's delimited files?

The delimiter varies based upon the file type. Files that end in .DEL have an @ (at) symbol as the delimiter. Files that end in .CSV have a comma delimiter. Files that end in .FF have a fixed width delimiter. Files that end in .PIP use the | (pipe) symbol as a delimiter. [06-14-2007]



83. How are OFAC's delimited files structured?

All of OFAC's delimited files are described in OFAC's SDN data file specification guide and non-SDN data specification guide. In addition, OFAC published the following tutorial on how to construct a basic relational database using OFAC s delimited list files. [04-21-2015]



84. Does OFAC maintain its files on an FTP server or in locations other than on its website?&nbsp; Does OFAC provide its files via Secure FTP (SFTP)?

Yes. OFAC maintains many of its sanctions list files on an FTP server.

This server can be accessed at: ftp://ofacftp.treas.gov.

The server will accept an anonymous login. OFAC's data is stored in the directories listed below.&nbsp; OFAC does not currently support connections to this server via SFTP.

/fac_sdn - SDN human-readable lists, legacy zip archive (XML and delimited files), and the advanced zip archive (advanced XML file)

/fac_delim - SDN data files (advanced XML file, legacy XML file, legacy delimited files) in un archived format

/ssi_list - All Sectoral Sanctions List files

/fse_list - All Foreign Sanctions Evaders List files

/ns_plc - All Non-SDN Palestinian Legislative Council Lists files

/consolidated_list - All Consolidated Non-SDN List data files [04-13-2017]



85. Is there a version of the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) data file archive that works with UNIX, Linux or other command line operating systems?

Yes. The standard zip archive should work with most UNIX and Linux systems and is available on OFAC's website at https://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/sdall.zip and its FTP site at ftp://ofacftp.treas.gov in the folder /fac_sdn. [08-06-2014]



87. Your FTP site has gone offline. Who should I contact to remedy this problem?

The FTP site at ofacftp.treas.gov is run by OFAC. Contact OFAC's support hotline at 1-800-540-6322 for technical support. [08-06-2014]



88. I am a developer looking to design an automated process that will download OFAC's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list and other sanctions lists without human intervention. How can I do this given that changes to the sanctions lists can be sporadic?

OFAC cannot give specific advice on how to design an automated system for downloading its sanctions list data. Many institutions solve this problem by setting up a scheduled download of the SDN List&nbsp;and other sanctions lists. These firms conduct their own risk assessments and decide how often they need to download the lists in order to comply with U.S. law. Institutions should be aware that OFAC is updating its sanctions lists at an ever increasing pace. If an institution has set up a periodic download schedule, the institution should occasionally reevaluate that schedule to ensure that it remains an effective risk mitigation technique. [01-30-2015]



89. I am a database administrator at a financial institution and am responsible for keeping my company's Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) data current. Is the SDN list comprehensive or do I need to download some kind of supplement to the list every time there is an update?

The SDN list is comprehensive. Database administrators can overwrite any old data in their systems with the latest versions of the list's data files, thus ensuring that their database is current. [09-10-2002]



90. Do you offer a Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) changes file or &quot;delta file&quot; in a data format? Do you offer delta files for OFAC's other sanctions lists?

No. OFAC records changes to the SDN and other sanctions lists in human-readable form in the recent actions section of its website. An archive of changes files found on this page. Database administrators interested in refreshing their databases with new SDN and other sanctions list data should use the comprehensive data files available on OFAC's website and completely refresh the list. [10-08-2013]



22. Does OFAC maintain or can it create a country-by-country list of Specially Designated Nationals (SDNs)?

OFAC has long maintained such a list. The file is available on OFAC's SDN Page under the link &quot;SDN List Sorted by Country.&quot; The file is also contained within the SDALL.ZIP archive and is called ctrylst.txt. It is important to understand that many SDN individuals and entities may operate in countries other than those in which they are based. The relevant regulations prohibit transactions with and/or block the property of SDNs wherever they are located. [04-14-2014]



105. OFAC says it has updated its Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list, but when I download the appropriate SDN files from the OFAC website, they appear to be out-of-date. Where can I get the latest SDN information?

OFAC has rigorous quality control procedures in place to ensure that all SDN data are current and accurate when they are released (including all of its human-readable list formats [in PDF and text]). All of the SDN information is downloaded and checked by OFAC personnel using the same interface that any member of the public might employ. A number of local issues can impact a user s ability to download current information; many of these issues are associated with caching done by a user s browser or by the firewall/security systems that protect a specific enterprise. OFAC can only offer technical support when it comes to OFAC provided data and OFAC managed systems (like the OFAC website or OFAC FTP servers). If you continue to have difficulty downloading the latest SDN information, OFAC recommends that you contact your internal IS/IT support and request their assistance in resolving a caching issue.&nbsp;&nbsp;[05-08-2018]


&nbsp;

Advanced XML Sanctions List Standard
&nbsp;

For additional information regarding OFAC's Advanced XML file formats, please see the following page.

&nbsp;



Weak Aliases


122. What are weak aliases (AKAs)?

A &quot;weak AKA&quot; is a term for a relatively broad or generic alias that may generate a large volume of false hits when such names are run through a computer-based screening system.&nbsp; OFAC includes these AKAs because, based on information available to it, the sanctions targets refer to themselves, or are referred to, by these names. As a result, these AKAs may be useful for identification purposes, particularly in confirming a possible &quot;hit&quot; or &quot;match&quot; triggered by other identifier information. Realizing, however, the large number of false hits that these names may generate, OFAC qualitatively distinguishes them from other AKAs by designating them as weak. OFAC has instituted procedures that attempt to make this qualitative review of aliases as objective as possible. Before issuing this updated guidance, OFAC conducted a review of all aliases on the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) list. Each SDN alias was run through a computer program that evaluated the potential of an alias to produce false positives in an automated screening environment. Names were evaluated using the following criteria:

Character length (shorter strings were assumed to be less effective in a screening environment than longer strings);
	The presence of numbers in an alias (digits 0-9);
	The presence of common words that are generally considered to constitute a nickname (example: Ahmed the Tall);
	References in the alias to geographic locations (example: Ahmed the Sudanese);
	The presence of very common prefixes in a name where the prefix was one of only two strings in a name (example: Mr. Smith).
Aliases that met one or more of the above criteria were flagged for human review. OFAC subject matter experts then reviewed each of the automated recommendations and made final decisions on the flagging of each alias.

OFAC intends to use these procedures to evaluate all new aliases added to its sanctions lists. [01-18-2011]



123. Where can I find weak aliases (AKAs)?

Weak AKAs appear differently depending on which file format of the sanctions list is being utilized.

In the TXT and PDF versions of the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) or other sanctions lists, weak AKAs are encapsulated in double-quotes within the AKA listing:

ALLANE, Hacene (a.k.a. ABDELHAY, al-Sheikh; a.k.a. AHCENE, Cheib; a.k.a. &quot;ABU AL-FOUTOUH&quot;; a.k.a. &quot;BOULAHIA&quot;; a.k.a. &quot;HASSAN THE OLD&quot;); DOB 17 Jan 1941; POB El Menea, Algeria (individual) [SDGT]

In the DEL, FF, PIP, and CSV file formats, weak AKAs are listed in the Remarks field (found at the end of the record) of the primary name file. In these formats, weak AKAs are bracketed by quotation marks. Please see the data specification documents for more information on the SDN and Consolidated lists.

SDN List Data Specifications: /system/files/126/dat_spec.txt
	Consolidated List Data Specifications: https://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/consolidated/cons_dat_spec.txt
8219 @&quot;ALLANE, Hacene&quot;@&quot;individual&quot;@&quot;SDGT&quot;@-0- @-0- @-0- @-0- @-0- @-0-@-0- @&quot;DOB 17 Jan 1941; POB El Menea, Algeria; a.k.a. 'ABU AL-FOUTOUH'; a.k.a. 'BOULAHIA'; a.k.a. 'HASSAN THE OLD'.&quot;

In the legacy XML version of OFAC's sanctions lists, there is a Type element for each AKA.&nbsp; The Type can either be 'weak' or 'strong' (see the XML SDN and Consolidated List Schemas (XSD files) at: /system/files/126/sdn.xsd and https://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/consolidated/consolidated.xsd for more information).

In the advanced XML list standard, alias quality is represented as a Boolean attribute of the alias element. This attribute, &quot;LowQuality&quot; can be flagged as either &quot;true&quot; or &quot;false.&quot; If the LowQuality attribute is false then the alias is strong. If the LowQuality attribute is true then the alias is weak.

For more information on the advanced XML standard, please visit OFAC s SDN data formats page at /policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-designated-nationals-list-data-formats-data-schemas. [01-30-2015]



124. Am I required to screen for weak aliases (AKAs)?

OFAC s regulations do not explicitly require any specific screening regime. Financial institutions and others must make screening choices based on their circumstances and compliance approach. As a general matter, though, OFAC does not expect that persons will screen for weak AKAs, but expects that such AKAs may be used to help determine whether a  hit arising from other information is accurate. [01-18-2011]



125. Will I be penalized for processing an unauthorized transaction involving a weak alias (AKA)?

A person who processes an unauthorized transaction involving a sanctions list entry has violated U.S. law and may be subject to an enforcement action.&nbsp; Generally speaking, however, if (i) the only sanctions reference in the transaction is a weak AKA, (ii) the person involved in the processing had no other reason to know that the transaction involved an entry on one of OFAC's sanctions lists or was otherwise in violation of U.S. law, and (iii) the person maintains a rigorous risk-based compliance program, OFAC will not issue a civil penalty against an individual or entity for processing such a transaction.&nbsp; [01-18-2011]








CISADA (Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010)


149. What activities by foreign financial institutions can subject them to CISADA sanctions?

As described in the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations, the sanctionable activities of a foreign financial institution are:


	Facilitating the efforts of the Government of Iran (GOI) to acquire or develop Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) or delivery systems for WMD or to provide support for terrorist organizations or acts of international terrorism;
	
	
	Facilitating the activities of a person subject to financial sanctions pursuant to UNSCRs 1737, 1747, 1803, or 1929, or any other Security Council resolution that imposes sanctions with respect to Iran;
	
	
	Engaging in money laundering, or facilitating efforts by the Central Bank of Iran or any other Iranian financial institution, to carry out either of the facilitating activities described above; or
	
	
	Facilitating a significant transaction or transactions or providing significant financial services for: (i) the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps or any of its agents or affiliates whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), or (ii) a financial institution whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to IEEPA in connection with Iran s proliferation of WMD, Iran s proliferation of delivery systems for WMD, or Iran s support for international terrorism.
	
&nbsp;



150. Where can I find a list of Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) affiliates and Iran-linked financial institutions  blocked pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) ?

The list of blocked IRGC affiliates and blocked Iran-linked financial institutions is dynamic and is based on the identity of  designated persons, which refers both to natural persons (i.e., individuals) and legal persons (such as corporations and other entities). The most recent list of designated persons  which includes most, but not all, blocked entities*  can be found at this link. The listings of designated IRGC entities will be followed by the tag [IRGC]; those of designated Iran-linked financial institutions will have the tag [IFSR].

*Under Department of the Treasury regulations, designated persons are those that are named on the list. All interests in property of such persons are blocked, and such persons are considered to have an interest in all property and entities in which they own, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest. As a result, such property and entities are also blocked, even if they do not themselves appear on the list.



151. How do the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(IFSR) define  U.S. financial institutions ?

The Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR)&nbsp;define  U.S. financial institutions  to include: depository institutions, banks, savings banks, money service businesses, trust companies, insurance companies, securities brokers and dealers, commodities exchanges, clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, and U.S. holding companies, U.S. affiliates, or U.S. subsidiaries of any of these entities. Covered institutions include those branches, offices, and agencies of foreign financial institutions that are located in the United States.



152. How do the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR)&nbsp;define  foreign financial institutions ?

The Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR)&nbsp;define  foreign financial institutions to include foreign depository institutions, banks, savings banks, money service businesses, trust companies, securities brokers and dealers, commodities exchanges, clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, and holding companies, affiliates, or subsidiaries of any of these entities.



153. How do the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR) define the term  knowingly ?

The term  knowingly as used in the IFSR means that a person has actual knowledge or should have known of specific conduct, a circumstance, or a result. In other words, the IFSR could be implicated if the Treasury Department finds that a foreign financial institution knew or should have known that it engaged in one or more of the sanctionable activities.



154. How does the Treasury Department determine whether a transaction or financial service is  significant for purposes of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR)?

As set out in the&nbsp;IFSR, in determining whether a transaction or financial service is  significant, the Treasury Department may consider: (1) the size, number, frequency, and nature of the transaction(s); (2) the level of awareness of management of the transaction(s) and whether or not the transaction(s) are a part of a pattern of conduct; (3) the nexus between the foreign financial institution involved in the transaction(s) and a blocked Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps individual or entity or blocked Iran-linked financial institution; (4) the impact of the transaction(s) on the goals of&nbsp; the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(CISADA); (5) whether the transaction(s) involved any deceptive practices; and (6) other factors the Treasury Department deems relevant on a case-by-case basis.



155. When are the prohibitions and strict conditions on foreign financial institutions correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States effective?

A finding by the Treasury Department that a foreign financial institution knowingly engages in one or more of the sanctionable activities is necessary before the Treasury Department can prohibit or impose strict conditions on the opening or maintaining in the United States of correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts for that foreign financial institution.



156. How will U.S. and foreign financial institutions know that the Treasury Department has made such a finding?

As a general matter, the Treasury Department will reach out to foreign financial institutions to inquire about their conduct before making a finding. If the Treasury Department decides to impose strict condition(s), the Treasury Department will issue an order or a regulation that sets out the strict condition(s) to be imposed on the U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts of the relevant foreign financial institution and publish the order or regulation in the Federal Register. The Federal Register is available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/. If the Treasury Department decides to prohibit the opening or maintaining of U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts for a foreign financial institution, the Treasury Department will add the name of the foreign financial institution and publish it to the part&nbsp;561 list.



157. How will the Treasury Department enforce the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR) with respect to U.S. entities?

Any U.S. person who violates the correspondent account provisions of the IFSR may be subject to civil penalties of up to the greater of $250,000 or twice the transaction value, and criminal penalties for willful violations of up to $1 million and 20 years in prison. A U.S. financial institution may be subject to civil penalties of up to the greater of $250,000 or twice the transaction value, if any person that it owns or controls violates the IFSR prohibition on engaging in any transaction with or benefitting the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)&nbsp;or any of its agents or affiliates whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), and if the U.S. financial institution knew or should have known that the person violated the IFSR.



158. Can the application of any part(s) of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR)&nbsp;be waived by the Department of the Treasury?

The Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(CISADA) provides for a waiver of the sanctions under the&nbsp;Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(IFSR)&nbsp;&nbsp;if the Secretary of the Treasury determines that a waiver is necessary to the national interest of the United States.



159. Where can I find the text of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations?

The text of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(IFSR)&nbsp;can be found at this link.





Executive Order 13599 (Blocking Property of the Government of Iran and Iranian Financial Institutions)

On February 5, 2012, the President signed Executive Order 13599 &nbsp;to implement section 1245(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, Public Law 112-81 ( NDAA ) and to take additional steps with respect to Iran. Effective as of 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time on February 6, 2012, the order blocks all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran (including the Central Bank of Iran), all Iranian financial institutions, and all persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the order. [02-06-2012]


160. Section 1 of E.O. 13599 blocks all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, including the Central Bank of Iran, and of all Iranian financial institutions, that are in the United States, that come within the United States, or that come within the possession or control of U.S. persons (including overseas branches). Can you provide further clarification about this provision of E.O. 13599?

E.O. 13599 requires U.S. persons to block (i.e., freeze) all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, including the Central Bank of Iran, and of all Iranian financial institutions, which also includes the Central Bank of Iran. This means that all individuals and entities that meet the definition of  Government of Iran ( GOI ) as defined by section 7(d) of the new E.O. as well as all Iranian financial institutions (whether or not they meet the definition of the GOI) are now blocked. Previously, under the Iranian Transactions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (the  ITR ), financial institutions and other U.S. persons were prohibited from engaging in transactions with the GOI. Under those prior rules, U.S. financial institutions receiving instructions to execute transactions involving these entities were not required to block the transactions, but were instead required to reject those instructions rather than carry them out, unless the transactions were exempt, authorized, or not prohibited by OFAC. The Executive Order defines an  Iranian financial institution as a financial institution organized under the laws of Iran or any jurisdiction within Iran (including foreign branches), any financial institution in Iran, any financial institution, wherever located, owned or controlled by the Government of Iran, and any financial institution, wherever located, owned or controlled by any of the aforementioned entities.

As a result, transactions involving entities bearing the [IRAN] tag on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons ( SDN List ) will now need to be blocked unless exempt or authorized by OFAC. Going forward, the [IRAN] tag will connote that a person or entity meets the definition of the term  GOI or  Iranian Financial Institution . OFAC will continue to update the SDN List and may add, delete, or edit entries as appropriate.

E.O. 13599 blocks the property and interests in property of any individual or entity that comes within its definition of the term  Government of Iran regardless of whether it is listed on the SDN List, and similarly it blocks the property and interests in property of all Iranian financial institutions as defined in the order regardless of whether the Iranian financial institution is listed on the SDN List.

E.O. 13599 builds upon the prohibitions in the ITR, which remain in effect.

Please note, pursuant to OFAC guidance, even when an entity does not itself appear on the SDN List or otherwise meet the definition of the GOI or an Iranian financial institution, the property and interests in property of that entity are blocked if the entity is owned, directly or indirectly, 50% or more by a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to an Executive Order or regulations administered by OFAC. [02-06-2012]



161. If all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, including the Central Bank of Iran, and of all Iranian financial institutions are blocked, can I conduct transactions involving the Government of Iran that have been previously authorized by OFAC?

Generally yes. Under new General License A, almost all transactions that are authorized under existing general licenses issued pursuant to the&nbsp;Iranian Transactions Regulations&nbsp;(ITR) or under existing OFAC specific licenses will continue to be authorized under the authority of&nbsp;&nbsp;E.O. 13599. However, transactions previously authorized under one existing ITR general license are not authorized pursuant to E.O. 13599. Specifically, the closing of accounts of the Government of Iran or an Iranian financial institution and the lump sum transfer of the balances to an account outside of the United States, which is authorized by sections 560.517(a)(3) &amp; (b)(2) of the ITR, is not authorized by General License A, and, therefore, those transactions are prohibited by E.O. 13599 and the accounts must be blocked. In addition, General License A does not authorize any payments from blocked funds or debits to blocked accounts, with a limited exception for payments from funds or debits to accounts blocked under the Iranian Assets Control Regulations (the hostage crisis blocking program that began in 1979) that are authorized by specific licenses issued by OFAC.

New General License B authorizes U.S. depository institutions and U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities to process noncommercial, personal remittances, to or from Iran, or for or on behalf of individuals ordinarily resident in Iran who are not included in the term  Government of Iran , provided that such funds transactions are not made by, to, or through a financial institution blocked pursuant to the Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 544 (the  WMDPSR ), or the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594 (the  GTSR ), or a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any other part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, or any Executive order, except an Iranian financial institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599.

Transactions not previously authorized by OFAC that involve property or interests in property of the Government of Iran, including the Central Bank of Iran, or of Iranian financial institutions must be blocked. [02-06-2012]



162. Are U.S. persons still required to comply with the Iranian Transactions Regulations (ITR)?

Yes.&nbsp;&nbsp;E.O. 13599&nbsp;builds upon the prohibitions of the ITR, and the prohibitions of the ITR remain in effect. [02-06-2012]



163. What are the differences and similarities between E.O. 13599 and the Iranian Transactions Regulations (ITR)?

The ITR prohibits virtually all direct or indirect transactions involving Iran or the Government of Iran by U.S. persons or with a nexus to the United States, unless otherwise authorized by OFAC or exempted by statute, but they do not contain blocking provisions. E.O. 13599&nbsp;requires U.S. persons to block all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, including the Central Bank of Iran, and of Iranian financial institutions, which also includes the Central Bank of Iran, unless it relates to a transaction that is exempted by statute or authorized by OFAC.

To illustrate the difference between how a transaction would be treated under the ITR and the new E.O., imagine a commercial wire transfer being processed through the U.S. financial system by order of a third-country, non-U.S. company for credit to a third-country financial institution in favor of a correspondent account it maintains for an Iranian financial institution. The transaction is not exempt or authorized by a general or specific license, and the Iranian bank is not blocked pursuant to the GTSR or the WMDPSR. Previously, under the ITR, any U.S. financial institution handling the transaction would have needed to reject the payment because allowing it to be processed would constitute a prohibited exportation of services to Iran. With the new E.O. in place, the U.S. financial institution would be required to block ( freeze ) that transaction. [02-06-2012]



164. The Iranian Transactions Regulations (ITR)&nbsp;authorize U.S. depository institutions and U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities to process transfers of funds to or from Iran if the transfer is a non-commercial, personal remittance. Are U.S. depository institutions and U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities still authorized to process such payments to or from a Government of Iran-owned bank that is not otherwise designated pursuant to another part of 31 C.F.R. Chapter V?

General License B under E.O. 13599&nbsp;authorizes U.S. depository institutions and U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities to process noncommercial, personal remittances to or from Iran provided that the payment is not made by, to, or through a financial institution designated by OFAC under the WMDPSR, or the GTSR, or a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any other part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, or any Executive order, except an Iranian financial institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599. Exempt or authorized transactions to or from Iran may also be processed subject to the above conditions.

Such transactions must be processed through a third country, as U.S. banks are prohibited from operating correspondent accounts for Iranian banks. The transactions may involve the use of blocked Iranian financial institutions as long as the Iranian financial institution is blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 (and not pursuant to any other Executive order or part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V) and there is a third-country, non-U.S. financial institution as an intermediary between the U.S. financial institution and the Iranian financial institution. [02-06-2012]



165. To what extent are U.S. persons expected to conduct enhanced due diligence to determine if transactions contain a Government of Iran interest?

E.O. 13599 requires U.S. persons to block all property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, unless otherwise exempt or authorized by OFAC.

Please contact the OFAC Hotline at 202-622-2490 or 1-800-540-6322, or by email at OFAC_Feedback@treasury.gov, for guidance regarding entities that you suspect are owned or controlled by the Government of Iran that do not appear on the SDN List. As a general matter, OFAC expects financial institutions to conduct due diligence on their own direct customers (including, for example, their ownership structure) to confirm that those customers are not persons whose property and interests in property are blocked.

With regard to other types of transactions where a financial institution is acting solely as an intermediary and fails to block transactions involving a sanctions target, OFAC will consider the totality of the circumstances surrounding the bank s processing of the transaction to determine what, if any, regulatory response is appropriate. [02-06-2012]



166. OFAC s SDN List contains a list of entities identified by OFAC as being the Government of Iran. Should U.S. persons now block the property and interests in property of those entities?

Yes, U.S. persons should now block the property and interests in property of the Government of Iran entities appearing on the SDN List, unless OFAC has authorized the underlying transaction or the transaction is exempt. [02-06-2012]



167. OFAC has granted my company a license under the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 ( TSRA ) and the&nbsp;Iranian Transactions Regulations&nbsp;&nbsp;(ITR). Can I continue to conduct the licensed transaction?

Under General License A issued pursuant to E.O. 13599, transactions authorized under existing specific licenses issued pursuant to TSRA and the&nbsp;&nbsp;ITR are authorized under E.O. 13599 until the specific license expires, per the terms of the license. [02-06-2012]



168. OFAC has issued me a (non-TSRA) specific license related to Iran, or the Government of Iran. Can I continue to conduct the licensed transactions?

Under General License A issued pursuant to E.O. 13599, transactions authorized by (non-TSRA) specific licenses issued prior to the issuance of E.O. 13599 and issued pursuant to any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V are also authorized under E.O. 13599. As set forth in General License A, in most cases these new authorizations under E.O. 13599 are in effect until theexpiration date of the individual specific license, or, if the specific license has no expiration date, until April 6, 2012. [02-06-2012]




&nbsp;


NDAA (Section 1245 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012)

On December 31, 2011, the President signed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, Public Law 112-81 ( NDAA ). Section 1245 of this statute requires the President to block the property and interests in property subject to U.S. jurisdiction of all Iranian financial institutions, including the Central Bank of Iran ( CBI ). It also aims to reduce Iranian oil revenues and discourage transactions with the CBI by providing for sanctions on foreign financial institutions that knowingly conduct or facilitate certain significant financial transactions with the CBI. Although the sanctions on foreign financial institutions authorized by section 1245 are similar to the financial sanctions under the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp; of 2010 (22 U.S.C. 8513(c)) ( CISADA ) (i.e., prohibiting and/or imposing strict conditions on opening or maintaining correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States), there are differences in the scope and operation of the two statutes. [02-14-2012]


169. What is the NDAA?

On December 31, 2011, the President signed into law the&nbsp;National Defense Authorization Act&nbsp;(NDAA). Section 1245 of the NDAA requires the President to block the property and interests in property subject to U.S. jurisdiction of all Iranian financial institutions, including the Central Bank of Iran&nbsp;(CBI). It also aims to reduce Iranian oil revenues and discourage transactions with the CBI by providing for sanctions on foreign financial institutions that knowingly conduct or facilitate certain significant financial transactions with the CBI. [02-14-2012]



170. What activities can trigger sanctions on a foreign financial institution under the NDAA?

For private financial institutions, the Act mandates that the President sanction those institutions that are found to knowingly conduct or facilitate any significant transactions with a U.S.-designated Iranian financial institution or with the Central Bank of Iran (CBI)  whether for the purchase of petroleum or otherwise  unless the transaction is for the sale of food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran. For all transactions with the CBI other than petroleum purchases, this provision takes effect on February 29, 2012, i.e., 60 days after the enactment of the Act. The timing of the petroleum purchase sanctions is discussed immediately below.

Private financial institutions and all other foreign financial institutions  including central banks or foreign state-owned or -controlled banks  potentially face sanctions under the NDAA if they knowingly conduct or facilitate significant financial transactions for the purchase of Iranian petroleum or petroleum products with a U.S.-designated Iranian financial institution or with the CBI after the provision takes effect as early as June 28, 2012, i.e., 180 days after enactment.* This NDAA provision may be held in abeyance beyond June 28, 2012, depending on the President s determination on the availability and price of alternative supplies. Foreign central and foreign state-owned or -controlled banks are also subject to these sanctions if the transactions are for the sale of petroleum or petroleum products to Iran and they occur after June 28, 2012.

All foreign financial institutions, including private and state-owned institutions, remain subject to section 104(c) of&nbsp;&nbsp;the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(CISADA), which calls for sanctions on foreign financial institutions that are found to have knowingly engaged in facilitating significant transactions for specific Iranian-linked individuals and entities. [02-14-2012]

*Irrespective of the timeframes set forth in the NDAA, any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates significant transactions with any U.S.-designated Iranian financial institution would still be subject to CISADA.



171. Does the NDAA&nbsp;(National Defense Authorization Act)&nbsp;repeal or amend Section 104(c) of CISADA (the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act)?

No. Any foreign financial institution that knowingly facilitates significant transactions or provides significant financial services for a U.S.-designated, Iranian-linked financial institution can be sanctioned under section 104(c) of CISADA and section 561.201 of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations ( IFSR ) even if those transactions are not sanctionable under section 1245(d) of the NDAA. Though the NDAA imposes sanctions on foreign financial institutions similar to financial sanctions under CISADA and the IFSR (i.e., prohibiting and/or imposing strict conditions on opening or maintaining correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States), there are differences in the scope and operation of the statutes. [02-14-2012]



172. How does Executive Order 13599,  Blocking Property of the Government of Iran and Iranian Financial Institutions, and the blocking of all Iranian financial institutions affect the financial sanctions provisions in CISADA? Do CISADA sanctions now apply to financial transactions with any Iranian financial institution?

The Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;(CISADA) applies to transactions with only those Iranian financial institutions that are designated in connection with Iran s WMD or terrorism activities and are denoted on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (the SDN list) with the [IFSR] tag. While E.O. 13599 does block the property of all Iranian financial institutions, that action is not grounded in the authorities that relate to counterproliferation or counterterrorism, and therefore does not implicate CISADA. [02-14-2012]



173. Are there any exceptions to the sanctions provisions in the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)?

Yes. The NDAA includes an exception that prohibits the President from imposing sanctions  with respect to any person for conducting or facilitating a transaction for the sale of food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran. [02-14-2012]



174. What are definitions for the following NDAA terms:  significant financial transaction,  knowingly,  owned or controlled by the government of a foreign country,  food, medicine, and medical devices,  foreign financial institution,  Iranian financial institution,  significantly reduced, and  whether the price and supply of petroleum and petroleum products produced in countries other than Iran is sufficient ?

 significant financial transaction

The Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR), which implement section 104(c) of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;(CISADA), identify factors to be used in determining what is significant (as it relates to transactions) in 31 C.F.R § 561.404, which allows the Secretary of the Treasury to consider the  totality of the facts and circumstances while providing a list of seven broad factors that can play a role in the determination, including: (1) the size, number, and frequency of transactions; (2) the nature of the transaction(s); (3) the level of awareness of management and whether the transaction(s) are part of a pattern of conduct; (4) the nexus between the transaction(s) and a blocked person; (5) the impact of the transaction(s) on statutory objectives; (6) whether the transaction(s) involve deceptive practices; and (7) such other factors that the Secretary deems relevant on a case-by-case basis. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of  significant for National Defense Authorization Act&nbsp;(NDAA) purposes on the IFSR.

We anticipate utilizing a broad definition of  financial transaction that encompasses  any transfer of value involving a financial institution. The term  transaction includes, but is not limited to, the following:


	The holding of nostro, vostro, or loro accounts for or with the Central Bank of Iran or designated banks, such as Bank Melli Iran and/or Bank Saderat Iran, including any of their branches or subsidiaries worldwide (collectively the  Listed Parties );
	
	
	The provision of trade finance and/or letter of credit services for or with Listed Parties;
	
	
	The provision of guarantees or similar instruments for or with Listed Parties;
	
	
	The provision of investment products or instruments for Listed Parties and/or the participation with Listed Parties in investments;
	
	
	The receipt or origination of wire transfers on behalf of or involving Listed Parties;
	
	
	The acceptance of commercial paper (both retail and wholesale) drawn on Listed Parties, and the clearance of such paper (including, but not limited to, checks and similar drafts);
	
	
	The receipt or origination of ACH or ATM transactions with Listed Parties; and/or
	
	
	Any other transactions for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, Listed Parties and/or with Listed Parties serving as correspondents, respondents, or beneficiaries. That would include transactions where the Listed Parties do not appear on the face of the transaction but where the transaction is undertaken with knowledge of the involvement of a Listed Party based on a relationship that exists through a third party such as a money exchange or trading house.
	
 knowingly

The IFSR defines  knowingly with respect to conduct, a circumstance, or a result, to mean that an entity or individual had actual knowledge, or should have known, about the conduct, the circumstance, or the result. 31 C.F.R. § 561.314. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term on the IFSR.

 owned or controlled by the government of a foreign country

The Iranian Transactions Regulations ( ITR ) define  an entity owned or controlled by the Government of Iran in section 560.313. Borrowing from that definition, a financial institution  owned or controlled by the government of a foreign country would be deemed to include a financial institution in which a foreign government owns a 50% or greater interest or which is otherwise controlled by a foreign government. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term under the NDAA on the ITR definition.

 food, medicine, and medical devices

 Food : The October 2011 general license for the ITR and the Sudanese Sanctions Regulations ( SSR ) authorizing certain food exports to Iran and Sudan defines  food as  items that are intended to be consumed by and provide nutrition to humans or animals in Iran  including vitamins and minerals, food additives and supplements, and bottled drinking water  and seeds that germinate into items that are intended to be consumed by and provide nutrition to humans or animals in Iran. The regulations also specify that food does not include alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, gum, or fertilizer. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term under the NDAA on this license definition.

 Medicine : ITR section 560.530(e)(2) states that:  For the purposes of this part, the term medicine has the same meaning given the term  drug in section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321) but does not include any item listed on the Commerce Control List in the Export Administration Regulations, 15 CFR part 774, supplement no. 1 (excluding items classified as EAR 99). Similarly, under the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Act ( TSRA ), 22 U.S.C. 7201(5),  [t]he term  medicine has the meaning given the term &quot;drug&quot; in section 321 of title 21. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term under the NDAA on the ITR and TSRA.

 Medical Devices : ITR section 560.530(e)(3) states that:  For the purposes of this part, the term medical device has the meaning given the term  device in section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 321) but does not include any item listed on the Commerce Control List in the Export Administration Regulations, 15 CFR part 774, supplement no. 1 (excluding items classified as EAR 99). Similarly, under TSRA, 22 U.S.C. 7201(4),  [t]he term &quot;medical device&quot; has the meaning given the term  device in section 321 of title 21. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term under the NDAA on the ITR and TSRA.

 foreign financial institution

 Foreign financial institution is defined in section 1245 of the NDAA with reference to section 104(i) of CISADA (22 U.S.C. § 8513(i)). As further defined in the IFSR, a  foreign financial institution is  any foreign entity that is engaged in the business of accepting deposits, making, granting, transferring, holding, or brokering loans or credits, or purchasing or selling foreign exchange, securities, commodity futures or options, or procuring purchasers and sellers thereof, as principal or agent. It includes but is not limited to depository institutions, banks, savings banks, money service businesses, trust companies, securities brokers and dealers, commodity futures and options brokers and dealers, forward contract and foreign exchange merchants, securities and commodities exchanges, clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, and holding companies, affiliates, or subsidiaries of any of the foregoing. 31 C.F.R. § 561.308. It does not include  the international financial institutions identified in 22 U.S.C. 262r(c)(2), the International Fund for Agricultural Development, or the North American Development Bank. 31 C.F.R. § 561.308. Treasury anticipates closely modeling the definition of this term under the NDAA on the IFSR.

 Iranian financial institution

This term is defined in E.O. 13599 &nbsp;as:  a financial institution organized under the laws of Iran or any jurisdiction within Iran (including foreign branches), any financial institution in Iran, any financial institution, wherever located, owned or controlled by the Government of Iran, and any financial institution, wherever located, owned or controlled by any of the foregoing. Such financial institutions include, but are not limited to, any foreign entity that is engaged in the business of accepting deposits, making, granting, transferring, holding, or brokering loans or credits, or purchasing or selling foreign exchange, securities, or commodity futures or options, or procuring purchasers and sellers thereof, as principal or agent. It includes but is not limited to depository institutions, banks, savings banks, money service businesses, trust companies, insurance companies, securities brokers and dealers, commodity futures and options brokers and dealers, forward contract and foreign exchange merchants, securities and commodities exchanges, clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, and holding companies, affiliates, or subsidiaries of any of the foregoing.

 significantly reduced

The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Energy, and the Director of National Intelligence, will make determinations as to whether any country has significantly reduced the volume of Iranian crude oil purchases. Any determinations will be preceded by a process of rigorous due diligence. The Secretary of State intends to consider relevant evidence in assessing each country s efforts to reduce the volume of crude oil imported from Iran, including the quantity and percentage of the reduction in purchases of Iranian crude oil over the relevant period, termination of contracts for future delivery of Iranian crude oil, and other actions that demonstrate a commitment to substantially decrease such purchases.

 whether the price and supply of petroleum and petroleum products produced in countries other than Iran is sufficient

The President will make a determination, based on the reports required by subparagraph (A) of Section 1245(d)(4) of the NDAA, as to whether the price and supply of petroleum and petroleum products produced in countries other than Iran is sufficient to permit purchasers of petroleum and petroleum products from Iran to reduce significantly in volume their purchases from Iran. [02-14-2012]



175. What is the scope of  petroleum products under the law?

As defined by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), petroleum products include unfinished oils, liquefied petroleum gases, pentanes plus, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, residual fuel oil, petrochemical feedstocks, special naphthas, lubricants, waxes, petroleum coke, asphalt, road oil, still gas, and miscellaneous products obtained from the processing of crude oil (including lease condensate), natural gas, and other hydrocarbon compounds. In keeping with the EIA s standard definition, petroleum products do not include natural gas, liquefied natural gas, biofuels, methanol, and other non-petroleum fuels. [02-14-2012]



176. If oil is being provided as payment for an outstanding debt, is such a transfer considered a  financial transaction ?

If a transfer involves a financial institution it would likely be considered a financial transaction. [02-14-2012]



177. If the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) is involved in providing settlement services for a transaction, or is otherwise acting solely as an intermediary in a transaction between a non-designated Iranian bank and a foreign financial institution, is the foreign financial institution deemed to be engaging in a transaction with the CBI?

Section 1245 targets any significant transactions  with the CBI; a transaction involving the CBI in an intermediary role would likely be viewed as a transaction  with the CBI. [02-14-2012]



178. Are barter trades involving the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) considered  financial transactions under Section 1245?

If a transfer involves a financial institution it would likely be considered a financial transaction. [02-14-2012]



179. Does the definition of  significant financial transaction exclude the passive holding of Central Bank of Iran (CBI) reserves? Is the U.S. willing to give assurances that this will not be a basis for sanctions?

This will be a case-by-case determination and will require specifics on what  passive holding entails. As a general matter, we would likely not view the holding of reserves as sanctionable in the following circumstances: the accounts are frozen or restricted, under which the CBI would be allowed to maintain accounts that it had already opened as of December 31, 2011, but would otherwise be unable to direct the disposition of those funds, with ordinary commercial interest payments and routine roll-overs of time deposits under pre-existing instructions being the only new transactions. [02-14-2012]



180. Are payments made under contracts existing prior to the date of enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) statute (December 31, 2011) exempted from the definition of  significant transactions ?

No general exception will be provided for payments arising out of pre-existing contracts. The assessment of whether such payments are  significant will be done on a case-by-case basis in line with the criteria discussed in FAQ #174. [02-14-2012]



181. Will the U.S. refrain from sanctioning foreign financial institutions that receive funds from the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) to repay loans? What if these loans were granted for projects that might be subject to the food, medicine, and medical device exemptions under the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)?

As noted, no general exception will be provided for payments arising out of pre-existing contracts. The assessment of whether such payments are  significant will be done on a case-by-case basis in line with the criteria discussed in FAQ #174. Regarding payments for food, medicine, and medical devices, the NDAA does not allow sanctions based on transactions for the sale of food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran. Payments related to the export of broader humanitarian items would be dealt with in our analysis of what constitutes a  significant financial transaction and would be considered on a case-by-case basis. [02-14-2012]



182. Is there a difference between entities that have been designated by the United States Government for illicit conduct, such as proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or support for terrorism, and those that are being blocked under E.O. 13599? How can I tell which entities appear on the Specially Designated National (SDN) List for which reasons?

Both blocked and designated entities appear on the SDN List.

 Blocked persons, in the context of E.O. 13599, appear on the SDN List due to the United States Government s identification of these entities as the Government of Iran and/or as an Iranian financial institution. Such entities are identified on the SDN List with the tag [IRAN]. For example, Bank Keshavarzi is a Government of Iran owned Iranian financial institution and is identified with the [IRAN] tag. Additionally, the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) is a non-financial institution that has been identified as the Government of Iran and bears the [IRAN] tag.

 Designated persons appear on the SDN List due to the United States Government s having determined that they meet the criteria set forth in any of a number of other Executive Orders concerning, for example, assisting Iran s weapons of mass destruction development, or aiding international terrorism and designating them for such activities. Such entities are identified on the SDN List with various tags other than [IRAN], such as [NPWMD] or [SDGT]. For example, Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines is listed as:  IRISL [NPWMD].

Note that many entries on the SDN List have more than one tag. For example: Bank Saderat Iran has three tags: [SDGT], indicating that it has been sanctioned for providing services to terrorism; [IRAN], indicating that it is the Government of Iran; and [IFSR], referring to the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations to signal to third country financial institutions that engage with entities with this tag that they risk sanctions under CISADA. [02-14-2012]




&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Executive Order 13606 (the GHRAVITY E.O.)

On April 22, 2012, the President signed Executive Order 13606 Blocking The Property And Suspending Entry into the United States of Certain Persons with Respect to Grave Human Rights Abuses by the Governments of Iran and Syria Via Information Technology (the  GHRAVITY E.O. ). Effective 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on April 23, 2012, the GHRAVITY E.O. blocks all property and interests in property of persons listed in its Annex, and all persons determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with or at the recommendation of the Secretary of State, to meet the criteria in the order. [04-23-2012]


183. Why did the President issue the GHRAVITY E.O.?

The GHRAVITY E.O. follows prior Executive orders issued by the President in response to the commission of human rights abuses by the Governments of Iran and Syria. With the GHRAVITY E.O., the President recognized that the commission of serious human rights abuses against the people of Iran and Syria by their governments, facilitated by computer and network disruption, monitoring, and tracking by those governments, threatens the national security and foreign policy of the United States. The GHRAVITY E.O. targets this activity in order to deter and disrupt such abuses. [04-23-2012]



184. What does the GHRAVITY E.O. do?

The GHRAVITY E.O. blocks (i.e., freezes) the property and interests in property of, among others, any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with or at the recommendation of the Secretary of State, (1) to have operated, or to have directed the operation of, information and communications technology that facilitates computer or network disruption, monitoring, or tracking that could assist in or enable serious human rights abuses by or on behalf of the Government of Iran or the Government of Syria; or (2) to have sold, leased, or otherwise provided, directly or indirectly, goods, services, or technology to Iran or Syria likely to be used to facilitate such activities.

U.S. persons in possession of property or interests in property belonging to persons listed in the Annex to the GHRAVITY E.O., or designated in the future by Treasury under the E.O., are obligated to block the property and report the blocking to OFAC within 10 days of blocking. Entities that are 50% or more owned by persons blocked by the GHRAVITY E.O. are also blocked, regardless of whether such entities appear on the Annex or OFAC s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons ( SDN list ). [04-23-2012]



185. What type of activities does the GHRAVITY E.O. target?

The GHRAVITY E.O. targets the provision and use of information and communications technology to facilitate computer or network disruption, monitoring, or tracking that could assist in or enable serious human rights abuses by or on behalf of the Government of Iran or the Government of Syria. It is not intended to block exports of technology that enable the Syrian and Iranian people to freely communicate among themselves and with the outside world.

 Information and communications technology means any hardware, software, or other product or service primarily intended to fulfill or enable the function of information processing and communication by electronic means, including transmission and display, including via the Internet. [04-23-2012]



186. How do I know that a person has been designated under the GHRAVITY E.O.?

Persons designated under the GHRAVITY E.O. appear on the publicly available Specially Designated Nationals List&nbsp;(SDN list) bearing the [HRIT] tag. U.S. persons are obligated to block property involving the persons bearing the tag [HRIT] on the SDN list, unless the transaction is exempt or otherwise authorized by OFAC. [04-23-2012]



187. Does the GHRAVITY E.O. prohibit me from exporting technology to companies that do business with Iran or Syria?

This E.O. does not generally prohibit transactions involving persons that do business with Iran or Syria, unless the person has been designated pursuant to this order. You should consult with the Department of Commerce s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) regarding exports to companies that do business with Syria. [04-23-2012]



188. If I am a non-U.S. company that exports information and communications technology to Iran or Syria, will I be designated under the GHRAVITY E.O.?

The measures in this order are designed primarily to address the need to prevent entities located in whole or in part in Iran and Syria from facilitating or committing serious human rights abuses. These measures are not designed to prevent the provision of information and communications technology necessary to enable the Iranian and Syrian people to freely communicate with each other and the outside world. That said, those providing communications technology to Iran or Syria that has the potential to facilitate computer or network disruption, monitoring, or tracking should exercise great caution given Iran and Syria s use of this technology to assist in the commission of serious human rights abuses. [04-23-2012]



189. Would I need authorization from OFAC or BIS if I wanted to export goods or technology to persons blocked under the GHRAVITY E.O.?

Yes. For more information regarding exports of goods or technology to persons blocked under the GHRAVITY E.O.&nbsp;please contact OFAC or BIS. [04-23-2012]



190. Are existing licenses issued by the U.S. Government involving persons designated under the GHRAVITY E.O. still valid?

U.S. persons who have been issued licenses involving persons designated under the GHRAVITY E.O. should check with the issuing agency regarding the validity of their licenses. [04-23-2012]




&nbsp;

&nbsp;

FSE Executive Order (Prohibiting Certain Transactions with and Suspending Entry into the United States of Foreign Sanctions Evaders with Respect to Iran and Syria)


191. What does Executive Order 13608  Prohibiting Certain Transactions with and Suspending Entry into the United States of Foreign Sanctions Evaders with Respect to Iran and Syria do?

This Executive Order gives Treasury new authorities. First, it strengthens Treasury s ability to address behavior by foreign individuals and entities determined to have violated, attempted to violate, conspired to violate, or caused a violation of U.S. sanctions on Syria or Iran. This E.O. also gives Treasury the authority to impose sanctions on foreign persons who have facilitated deceptive transactions for or on behalf of persons subject to U.S. sanctions.

Transactions by U.S. persons or within the United States involving persons sanctioned under this authority are prohibited, effectively cutting the listed persons off from the U.S. marketplace and financial system. By cutting off access to the U.S. marketplace and financial system to such sanctions evaders, Executive Order 13608 provides Treasury with a powerful tool to prevent and deter such behavior and to hold such persons accountable and to convince them to change their behavior. Publicly identifying such persons will also allow U.S. persons to avoid unwittingly engaging in transactions with identified foreign persons that may expose U.S. persons to the risk of sanctions violations. [05-01-2012]



192. Why was this authority needed?

Executive Order 13608 expands Treasury s ability to address the behavior of foreign persons determined to have violated or attempted to violate U.S. sanctions on Syria or Iran, or to have facilitated deceptive transactions on behalf of persons subject to those sanctions, where the foreign person had no physical, financial, or other presence in the United States and did not submit to U.S. administrative proceedings. Treasury may use this authority where it appears that a foreign person violated U.S. sanctions on Iran or Syria but may not meet criteria for designation under existing Executive Orders. Executive Order 13608 will provide a means through which Treasury can limit the risk to U.S. commercial and financial systems posed by foreign persons determined to have violated U.S. sanctions on Iran or Syria, or to have engaged in deceptive transactions for or on behalf of persons subject to U.S. sanctions on Iran or Syria.

Such a listing under Executive Order 13608 also provides Treasury with the capability to put the world on notice as to such foreign persons activity and the risk of similar future activity. Such identification will help prevent U.S. persons from unwittingly engaging in transactions with foreign persons that may pose a risk of sanctions violations. [05-01-2012]



193. What are the repercussions of an individual or entity being identified under Executive Order 13608?

If an individual or entity is made subject to sanctions under this authority, U.S. persons generally may no longer provide to or procure from such individual or entity any goods, services, or technology. From a practical standpoint, it means that the sanctioned individual or entity will be cut off from the U.S. commercial and financial systems. [05-01-2012]



194. Are U.S. persons required to block the property of individuals and entities identified under Executive Order 13608?

No. Identifications or listings under Executive Order 13608&nbsp;do not block any assets. However, a U.S. person may not provide or procure goods or services, including financial services, or technology to or from a listed person without authorization from OFAC, unless the transaction is otherwise exempt from regulation under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (e.g., certain travel-related transactions). [05-01-2012]



336. How do I know whether a person is identified under E.O. 13608?

Please refer to the Foreign Sanctions Evaders (FSE) List. [02-06-2014]



195. I am a financial institution. What do I do if I receive a wire transfer involving a listed party?

A U.S. financial institution must reject any wire transfer involving a listed person and file a report with OFAC within 10 days. [05-01-2012]



196. I am a financial institution and I hold an account for a listed person. What do I do with the funds?

The account is not blocked; however, it is restricted and you cannot allow it to be operated without authorization from OFAC. [05-01-2012]



197. What are U.S. persons obligated to do with property of a person listed under Executive Order 13608?

Property of a listed person is not blocked, but U.S. persons must have authorization from OFAC to provide or procure such property to or from a listed person, or to provide or procure services to or from a listed person in connection with such property. Additionally, wire transfers involving the assets of an Executive Order 13608-listed person must be rejected. [05-01-2012]



198. May a U.S. person deal with an Executive Order 13608-listed person so long as the dealing does not involve Iran or Syria?

No. U.S. persons are prohibited from all transactions or dealings described in Executive Order 13608&nbsp;with persons listed under Executive Order 13608, unless authorized by OFAC or where the transaction is otherwise exempt from regulation under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act . [05-01-2012]



199. How is an identification or listing under Executive Order 13608 different from a designation?

Like a designation, a U.S. person is prohibited, unless authorized by OFAC or if the underlying transaction is exempt from regulation under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act , from dealing with an identified or listed person. Unlike a blocking designation, the property and the interests in property of a person listed under Executive Order 13608 are not blocked. [05-01-2012]



200. How is this different from lists maintained by the Department of Commerce?

Treasury s authority under Executive Order 13608 has some similarities to Commerce s authority under the Export Administration Regulations ( EAR ). Commerce may impose denial orders on persons (both foreign and U.S.) who have committed violations of the EAR or present an imminent risk of committing a violation. These individuals or organizations are listed on Commerce s Denied Persons List. It is prohibited to deal with Denied Persons in any export transaction involving items (commodities, software, and technology) subject to the EAR. Treasury s authority under Executive Order 13608 complements Commerce s authority by addressing at least two types of sanctions violations that are outside the scope of the EAR. Specifically, Treasury may prohibit the provision of services (in addition to goods and technology) to or from identified or listed persons and Treasury may prohibit transactions or dealings involving goods and technology that are not subject to the EAR. However, unlike Commerce s authority, Treasury s authority to sanction or list an individual or entity under Executive Order 13608 may be implemented only with respect to foreign individuals or entities. [05-01-2012]



201. May a U.S. person deal with a person listed under Executive Order 13608 in a transaction that was previously licensed by OFAC?

No. U.S. persons cannot have any dealings with a person identified or listed under this Executive Order absent specific authorization from OFAC pursuant to the Executive Order 13608, unless the transaction is exempt from regulation under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act . [05-01-2012]



202. What if the transaction is already underway?

If a transaction is underway at the time of a listing, a U.S. person must cease dealing with the listed person and the U.S. person is prohibited from engaging in transactions or dealings in or related to any goods, services, or technology to or from the listed person, unless the transaction is exempt under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act , or until such time that OFAC authorizes the transactions pursuant to the Executive Order 13608. Additionally, if the transaction underway involves a wire transfer, a U.S. financial institution must reject it and file a report with OFAC within 10 days.

Like all of its programs, OFAC has the authority under Executive Order 13608 to license transactions that are consistent with U.S. foreign policy. [05-01-2012]



203. Can a U.S. person use a listed person to facilitate personal remittances to or from Iran or Syria?

No. Without specific authorization from OFAC, U.S. persons cannot use a listed person to process personal remittances. [05-01-2012]



204. Will Treasury pursue an enforcement action before identifying or listing a person pursuant to Executive Order 13608?

The authorities granted under this Executive Order&nbsp;are in addition to current authorities that Treasury has to pursue an enforcement action for violations of U.S. law, and Treasury is not required to pursue a civil enforcement action prior to identifying or listing a person pursuant to Executive Order 13608. [05-01-2012]




&nbsp;


Treasury CISADA Findings Against Bank of Kunlun


207. What were the criteria for this finding? How many other institutions were you looking at and why did you decide to take action against Bank of Kunlun?

Based on information made available to the Treasury Department, the Department has found that China s Bank of Kunlun has knowingly facilitated significant transactions for various Iranian-linked banks designated by the United States under our WMD or terrorism authorities.

Upon finding that Bank of Kunlun was knowingly engaged in these activities that are sanctionable under&nbsp;the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp; (CISADA), the Secretary of the Treasury has prohibited U.S. banks from opening or maintaining correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States for Bank of Kunlun  effectively cutting off Bank of Kunlun s direct access to the U.S. financial system.

Since CISADA was signed into law in July 2010, Treasury has engaged with over 120 financial institutions and bank regulators in more than 60 countries all over the world to brief them on the financial provisions of CISADA, and, in cases where we had specific concerns, has shared information about those concerns.

This global engagement campaign has proven highly successful, as we have seen the overwhelming majority of financial institutions with which we have engaged change their business practices  even close any correspondent accounts with U.S. designated Iranian banks  to ensure that their access to the U.S. financial system is not put at risk.

The July 31, 2012 action against Bank of Kunlun was in response to its ongoing relationships with U.S.-designated Iranian banks.

Note: The Treasury Department had also made a CISADA finding against Iraq s Elaf Islamic Bank on July 31, 2012. On May 17, 2013, Elaf Islamic Bank was delisted and its name was removed from the Part 561 List. [05-17-2013]



208. How are you defining  significant transactions and financial services?

In determining whether transactions or financial services are significant, the Secretary of the Treasury may consider a number of factors related to the transactions or services, including, but not limited to: size, number, and frequency; type, complexity and commercial purpose; the level of awareness or involvement by the bank s management; whether the activity or payment illustrates a pattern of practice or is an isolated event; the ultimate economic benefit conferred upon the designated person(s); and whether the transactions involved the use of deceptive financial practices to obscure the identities of the parties involved.

Bank of Kunlun

Bank of Kunlun has provided hundreds of millions of dollars worth of services to U.S. designated Iranian banks. These financial services include maintaining accounts, transferring payments, and serving as the paying bank for letters of credit opened by U.S. designated Iranian banks. The facilitation of hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars worth of transactions with U.S. designated Iranian banks over the past year is significant.

In 2012, after Treasury designated Bank Tejarat, Bank of Kunlun transferred hundreds of payments totaling approximately $100 million dollars for accounts it holds for Bank Tejarat and made a payment for an IRGC affiliate pursuant to a letter of credit opened by Bank Tejarat. [05-17-2013]



209. What happens to the correspondent and payable-through accounts held by Bank of Kunlun in the United States?

To our knowledge, Bank of Kunlun does not currently hold correspondent accountswith U.S. financial institutions.

The July 31, 2012 action prohibits financial institutions in the United States from opening or maintaining correspondent or payable-through accountsfor Bank of Kunlun. [05-17-2013]



210. What are the consequences for a U.S. financial institution that maintains or opens a new correspondent or payable-through account for Bank of Kunlun?

A U.S. financial institution that maintains or opens a&nbsp;correspondent&nbsp; or payable-through account&nbsp;for Bank of Kunlun is subject to civil penalties in the amount of up to $250,000 or twice the value of the transaction, whichever is greater.

Criminal penalties of up to $1 million can be imposed for willful violations, and individuals who willfully violate the prohibition can face up to 20 years in prison. [05-17-2013]



211. If a foreign financial institution continues to do business with Bank of Kunlun, could that lead to a CISADA finding against the other institution?

Any foreign financial institution that&nbsp;knowingly&nbsp;facilitates significant transactionson behalf of designated Iranian banks  whether directly or indirectly  may face&nbsp;Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act(CISADA) sanctions. OFAC defines  knowingly in this context as meaning the financial institution knew or should have known of the conduct, circumstance, or result. Bank of Kunlun has demonstrated its willingness to move hundreds of millions dollars on behalf of designated Iranian banks. Accordingly, we would expect heightened due diligence in any dealings with Bank of Kunlun. [05-17-2013]



212. Does this finding affect Bank of Kunlun s branches or subsidiaries around the world? Does this finding affect any holding companies?

The prohibitions implemented as a result of today s action apply to Bank of Kunlun and all of its offices, around the world. [05-17-2013]



213. Are United States financial institutions that do not hold correspondent or payable-through accounts for Bank of Kunlun required to block or reject transactions that otherwise involve Bank of Kunlun?

No. U.S. financial institutions are not required to block or reject financial or trade transactions that involve Bank of Kunlun.

That said, we would expect heightened due diligence in any dealings with Bank of Kunlun given its demonstrated willingness to facilitate transactions on behalf of Iranian banks designated by well over a dozen countries worldwide. [05-17-2013]



214. What is the licensing process for U.S. financial institutions that need to conduct transactions in order to close correspondent or payable-through accounts with a foreign financial institution sanctioned pursuant to the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act (CISADA)?

Treasury regulations provide a 10-day period in which U.S. financial institutions are authorized to engage in the transactions necessary to close an affected account. If a U.S. financial institution that is in the process of closing an affected account seeks to engage in transactions beyond those already authorized, Treasury may issue specific licenses on a case-by-case basis. [05-17-2013]



215. What is the difference, in practical effect, between this and a designation under one of your other authorities, like E.O. 13382?

The July 31, 2012&nbsp;Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;(CISADA) finding prohibits the opening or maintaining of correspondent accounts or payable-through accountsin the United States for Bank of Kunlun. This action does not require the immediate freezing of any assets that Bank of Kunlun may hold within U.S. jurisdiction. [05-17-2013]




&nbsp;


Executive Order 13622 of July 30, 2012,  Authorizing Additional Sanctions With Respect to Iran

E.O. 13622 was revoked by E.O. 13716 of January 16, 2016. Please be advised that certain provisions of E.O. 13622 have been incorporated into E.O. 13846 of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran . FAQs relating to E.O. 13846 can be found here. FAQs relating to E.O. 13622 have been archived and can be found here. [08-06-2018] [08-06-2018]



&nbsp;


Determination Pursuant to Section 312 of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act (TER)

Section 312 of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (TRA) requires the Secretary of the Treasury, no later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of TRA, to determine whether the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) or the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) is an agent or affiliate of Iran s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), and to report to Congress on these determinations and the reasons for them. On September 24, 2012, the Department of the Treasury made a determination that NIOC is an agent or affiliate of the IRGC. Based on the information currently available, Treasury is not able to determine at this time whether NITC is an agent or affiliate of the IRGC.


233. Isn't t the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) already subject to sanctions?

Yes. Executive Order 13622 provides for sanctions on foreign financial institutions found to have knowingly conducted or facilitated significant financial transactions with NIOC (except for sales of refined petroleum products to NIOC that fall below the dollar threshold that could trigger sanctions under the Iran Sanctions Act). Executive Order 13622 also provides authority for the Secretary of the Treasury to block the property and interests in property of persons determined to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, NIOC (as well as other specified entities). Note, however, that these sanctions are not applicable to certain transactions related to the Shah Deniz pipeline project, in which NIOC has a minority stake, under Executive Order 13622. In addition, NIOC was already blocked as an entity of the Government of Iran&nbsp;under &nbsp;E.O. 13599, which was issued pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), as amended, among other authorities. Nevertheless, as described below, the determination that NIOC is an agent or affiliate of the IRGC carries consequences.



234. What is the effect of the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) determination? Are there CISADA implications?

As a result of this the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(TRA) section 312 determination, NIOC now is also a person described under section 104(c)(2)(E)(i) of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act of 2010 (CISADA) as an agent or affiliate of the IRGC whose property or interests in property are blocked pursuant to IEEPA. This means that foreign financial institutions determined to knowingly facilitate significant transactions or provide significant financial services for NIOC are exposed to CISADA sanctions, including prohibitions or the imposition of strict conditions on the opening or maintaining of correspondent or payable-through accounts in the United States.

In addition, section 302 of TRA&nbsp; requires sanctions on foreign persons determined to have knowingly provided certain material support to, or engaged in significant transactions with, the IRGC or its officials, agents, or affiliates whose property or interest in property are blocked. Consequently, foreign persons that knowingly engage in significant transactions with NIOC after the September 24, 2012 determination could be exposed to sanctions.

An  IRGC identifier will be added to NIOC s entry on the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List available on OFAC s website.

As noted below, the potential application of sanctions under section 104(c)(2)(E)(i) of CISADA and section 302 of TRA is affected by whether the country with primary jurisdiction has received a significant reduction exception from the Secretary of State.



235. What are the implications for petroleum purchase transactions involving NIOC by financial institutions and entities in countries that have received a significant reduction exception from the Secretary of State?

Significant transactions, financial services, or material support involving National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) for the purchase of Iranian petroleum or petroleum products by a foreign financial institution or entity based in a country that has received a significant reduction exception from the Secretary of State do not carry potential sanctions consequences  under&nbsp;&nbsp;the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;(CISADA), sections 302 and 312 of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(TRA), section 1245 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (NDAA), or sections 1 and 2 of&nbsp;&nbsp;Executive Order 13622. Sections 302 and 312 of TRA authorize the President not to impose sanctions for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran if an exception under subsection 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA applies to the country with primary jurisdiction over the foreign financial institution at the time of the transactions or the provision of services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any significant transaction for other sanctioned entities (such as Iranian designated banks or other persons described in section 104(c)(2)(E) of CISADA) may result in sanctions, regardless of whether the transaction is for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products and involves NIOC.



236. Does the determination regarding the National&nbsp;Iranian Tanker Company&nbsp;(NITC) mean that there is no affiliation between NITC and the IRGC?

This statement means only that, based on the currently available information, Treasury is not able to determine at this time that NITC is an agent or affiliate of the IRGC.



237. How does the effect of this determination compare to the effect of section 1(a) of Executive Order 13622 as to transactions with National Iranian Oil Company&nbsp;(NIOC)?

The effect of the determination is similar to the effect of Executive Order 13622&nbsp;section 1(a), which provides for prohibitions on the opening of and prohibitions or strict conditions on maintaining correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States for foreign financial institutions determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to have knowingly conducted or facilitated significant financial transactions with NIOC. Executive Order 13622 likewise contains an exception that covers transactions with NIOC conducted or facilitated by foreign financial institutions based in NDAA-excepted jurisdictions. A significant difference between these authorities is that the National Defense Authorization&nbsp;Act&nbsp;(NDAA) exception in the&nbsp;Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(TRA) section 312 is limited to transactions or financial services for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran.





Section 4 of Executive Order 13628 of October 9, 2012, &quot;Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 and Additional Sanctions with Respect to Iran&quot;

E.O. 13628 was amended by E.O. 13716 of January 16, 2016 and revoked by E.O. 13846 of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran . Please be advised that section 8 of E.O. 13846 continues in effect the sanctions previously contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628 and expands them to cover activity sanctionable under E.O 13846.&nbsp; FAQs relating to E.O. 13846 can be found here. FAQs relating to Section 4 of E.O. 13628 have been archived and can be found here. [08-06-2018]



&nbsp;


Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations and the Statement of Licensing Procedure on Support Of Human Rights-, Humanitarian-, and Democracy-Related Activities With Respect to Iran

The Office of Foreign Assets Control (&quot;OFAC&quot;) issued a final rule in the Federal Register on October 22, 2012, changing the heading of the Iranian Transactions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (the &quot;ITR&quot;), to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (the &quot;ITSR&quot;), and amending the renamed ITSR to implement Executive Order (&quot;E.O.&quot;) 13599 (other than section 11) and sections 1245(c) and (d)(1)(B) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (the &quot;NDAA&quot;). These new regulations implement the blocking of the Government of Iran and all Iranian financial institutions pursuant to E.O. 13599 and the NDAA.

OFAC is adding numerous new sections to the ITSR, including prohibitions, definitions, interpretations, and licensing provisions. OFAC also is revising many existing sections of the ITSR in order to take account of the new government-wide blocking as well as the blocking of all Iranian financial institutions. Due to the extensive nature of these and other amendments described below, OFAC is reissuing the ITSR in their entirety.

In addition, OFAC is publishing on the Iran section of its Web site a Statement of Licensing Procedure on Support of Human Rights-, Humanitarian-, and Democracy-Related Activities with Respect to Iran. The Statement of Licensing Procedure reflects procedures established pursuant to the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act&nbsp;of 2012 (the &quot;TRA&quot;), which was signed into law by the President on August 10, 2012.


241. What are the major changes that the Iranian Transaction and&nbsp;Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(ITSR) implement in superseding the Iranian Transaction Regulations (ITR)?

The ITSR block the property and interests in property of the Government of Iran and all Iranian financial institutions that come within the possession or control of any U.S. person, including any foreign branch, and prohibit all U.S. persons from dealing with any property interests whatsoever, present, future, or contingent, of persons identified as already blocked pursuant to E.O. 13599and&nbsp;the National Defense Authorization&nbsp;Act&nbsp;(NDAA).

OFAC is adding section 560.211 to the ITSR to implement the blocking prohibitions set forth in E.O. 13599 and the NDAA. New sections 560.212 through 560.214 are being added to set forth certain consequences and requirements that stem from the blocking prohibitions, including, inter alia, the requirement to hold blocked funds in interest-bearing accounts. New paragraphs (e) and (f) are being added to section 560.210 to incorporate two exemptions from the blocking prohibitions that are set forth in E.O. 13599. These exemptions concern the official business of the Federal Government and the property and interests in property of the Government of Iran that were blocked pursuant to Executive Order 12170 of November 14, 1979. [10-22-2012]



242. The&nbsp;ITSR includes revisions to the ITR pertaining to the transfer of funds to or from Iran. Accordingly, how may I transfer funds to or from Iran that arise from, and are ordinarily incident and necessary to give effect to, an underlying transaction that is authorized under the ITSR?

The Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations(ITSR) authorize United States depository institutions to process transfers of funds to or from Iran, or for the direct or indirect benefit of persons in Iran or the Government of Iran , if the transfer arises from, and is ordinarily incident and necessary to give effect to, an underlying transaction that has been authorized by a specific or general license issued pursuant to, or set forth in, the ITSR and does not involve debiting or crediting an Iranian account. See 31 CFR 560.516(a).

In addition, the ITSR authorize United States registered brokers or dealers in securities to process transfers of funds to or from Iran, or for the direct or indirect benefit of persons in Iran or the Government of Iran, if the transfer arises from, and is ordinarily incident and necessary to give effect to, an underlying transaction that has been authorized by a specific or general license issued pursuant to, or set forth in, the ITSR and does not involve debiting or crediting an Iranian account. See 31 CFR 560.516(b).

The authorizations set forth in section 560.516 of the ITSR do not allow a U.S. person who is authorized to engage in the underlying transaction to deal directly with money service businesses (MSBs) or hawalas, wherever located. However, these authorizations do not preclude United States depository institutions or United States registered brokers or dealers in securities from engaging or dealing with third-country MSBs or hawalas in the processing of the authorized transfers pursuant to section 560.516 of the ITSR. [10-22-2012]



243. How can I send personal remittances to or from Iran under the Iranian Transaction and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR)?

The ITSR authorize the transfer of funds that are noncommercial and personal in nature to or from Iran or for or on behalf of an individual ordinarily resident in Iran, other than an individual whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to § 560.211, subject to certain restrictions and limitations. See 31 CFR 560.550. Such transfers must be processed by a United States depository institution or a United States registered broker or dealer in securities and not by any other U.S. person. The personal remittances general license does not permit a U.S. person to deal directly with money service businesses (MSBs) or hawalas, wherever located. However, this general license does not preclude United States depository institutions or United States registered brokers or dealers in securities from engaging or dealing with third-country MSBs or hawalas in the processing of the authorized transfers pursuant to section 560.550 of the ITSR.

The hand-carrying of certain noncommercial, personal remittances is also authorized, provided that the individual who is a U.S. person is hand-carrying the funds on his or her behalf, but not on behalf of another person. See 31 CFR 560.550. [10-22-2012]



244. What effect will the Iranian Transaction and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) have on Iranian-Americans and the people of Iran?

The ITSR include several general licenses that newly authorize, or continue to authorize, activities that are otherwise prohibited by the regulations. Categories of activities affected by these changes include, among other things, visa-related transactions, journalistic activities in Iran, the sale of real property in Iran and the transfer of related proceeds to the United States, educational activities (including certain exchange programs), participation in conferences, and the exportation and reexportation of medicine and basic medical supplies to Iran. [10-22-2012]



245. What does the Statement of Licensing Procedure on Support of Human Rights-, Humanitarian-, and Democracy-Related Activities with Respect to Iran do?

The Statement of Licensing Procedure reflects procedures established pursuant to section 413 of the&nbsp;Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act&nbsp;&nbsp;(the TRA). These procedures stipulate that, as of the effective date of the TRA, license determinations for complete requests for authorization under this policy shall be made not later than 90 days after receipt by OFAC, with certain exceptions. The Statement of Licensing Policy applies to applications submitted by the following categories of U.S. persons seeking to engage in certain human rights-, humanitarian-, and democracy-related activities with respect to Iran: (1) entities receiving funds from the Department of State to engage in the proposed activity; (2) the Broadcasting Board of Governors; and (3) other appropriate agencies of the United States Government. The ITSR also include separate statements of licensing policy related to the sharing of information over the Internet in Iran and the support of democracy and human rights in Iran and academic and cultural exchange programs. [10-22-2012]




&nbsp;


Implementation of Section 504 of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (the TRA)

On August 10, 2012, the President signed into law&nbsp;the&nbsp;Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human RightsAct of 2012, Public Law 112-158 ( TRA ). Section 504 of the TRA amends section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012, Public Law 112-81 ( NDAA ), which the President signed into law on December 31, 2011. The section 504 amendments to the NDAA took effect February 6, 2013. Amendments to the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 561 (the  IFSR ) were published on March 15, 2013, to implement sections 503 and 504 of the  TRA and certain provisions of Executive Order 13622of July 30, 2012.&nbsp; Although Executive Order 13716 of January 16, 2016 revoked Executive Order 13622, the relevant provisions of Executive Order 13622 were reimposed by Executive Order 13846 of August 6, 2018.


254. What does section 504 of the TRA do?

Pursuant to the restrictions already in place under the National Defense Authorization&nbsp;Act&nbsp;(NDAA), foreign financial institutions ( FFIs ) face restrictions on, or loss of, correspondent and payable-through account access in the United States if they knowingly engage in significant financial transactions with the Central Bank of Iran ( CBI ) or a designated Iranian financial institution, unless an NDAA exception, such as the significant reduction exception, applies. The NDAA significant reduction exception applies if the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and other agencies, has determined that the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI has significantly reduced its purchases of Iranian crude oil during a specified period of time.

Effective February 6, 2013, section 504 amends the NDAA in several ways. Most importantly, it narrows the NDAA s significant reduction exception to (a) exempt from sanctions only transactions that conduct or facilitate bilateral trade in goods or services between the country granted the exception and Iran, and (b) require that funds owed to Iran as a result of the bilateral trade be credited to an account located in the country granted the exception and not be repatriated to Iran. In addition, it -

(i) eliminates the distinction between state-owned or -controlled FFIs (not including foreign central banks) and private FFIs, thereby expanding the scope of sanctionable transactions for state-owned or -controlled FFIs with the CBI or designated Iranian financial institutions; and

(ii) clarifies that countries that have reduced their Iranian crude oil purchases to zero may continue to receive the significant reduction exception.

The sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran (the  Humanitarian Exception ) is not impacted by section 504 of the TRA.

The purchase or acquisition of petrochemicals from Iran remain sanctionable activities and are not subject to the significant reduction exception. [2-6-2013]



255. Do the section 504 modifications&nbsp;of the TRA&nbsp;restrict any other dealings with Iran?

Yes, the section 504 modifications also narrow the scope of transactions excepted from certain sanctions available under E.O. 13622. Accordingly,&nbsp;foreign financial institutions&nbsp;(FFIs) in countries that are determined by the Secretary of State to have significantly reduced their purchases of Iranian crude oil pursuant to the NDAA, that knowingly conduct significant financial transactions with the National Iranian Oil Company ( NIOC ), the Naftiran Intertrade Company ( NICO ), or otherwise for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran, are only eligible for the significant reduction exception if the FFIs adhere to the bilateral trade restrictions, credit the funds to an account in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, and do not repatriate the funds to Iran.

Example 1: A FFI in a country which has received a significant reduction exception and with primary jurisdiction over the FFI may facilitate a transaction enabling an oil refinery in that country to purchase crude oil from Iran without having exposure to U.S. correspondent account sanctions, so long as the transaction meets section 504 s bilateral trade requirements, the funds are credited to an account in the FFI in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, and the funds are not repatriated to Iran.

Example 2: If, however, a FFI in a country which has received a significant reduction exception facilitates a third country s crude oil purchase  even a third country with a significant reduction exception  from Iran, the FFI would have exposure to sanctions because the transaction was not solely for the FFI host country s purchase of crude oil from Iran. [2-6-2013]



256. What transactions are impacted by section 504 of the TRA as it amends section 1245 of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2012?

Significant financial transactions* knowingly conducted or facilitated by a&nbsp;foreign financial institution (FFI) with the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) on or after November 5, 2018 or with a designated Iranian financial institution may be subject to&nbsp;sanctions under the National Defense Authorization&nbsp;Act&nbsp;(NDAA) and section 561.203 of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR), 31 C.F.R. Part 561, unless 

(i) the country that has primary jurisdiction over the FFI conducting or facilitating such significant financial transactions has received a significant reduction exception under section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA; and
(ii) the significant financial transaction is for bilateral trade only, and any funds owed to Iran as a result of such trade are credited to an account at the FFI in the country that has primary jurisdiction over the FFI and are not repatriated to Iran.

However, any FFI that knowingly facilitates significant transactions or provides significant financial services for persons designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction pursuant to E.O.s 13224 or 13382 can be sanctioned under section 104(c) of&nbsp;the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act of 2010 ( CISADA ) and section 561.201 of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (IFSR), even if those transactions are not sanctionable under section 1245(d) of the NDAA, section 561.203 of the IFSR, sections 1244 and 1247 of the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012, and Executive Order 13846 for countries that receive an SRE. [11-05-2018]

* These do not include sales relating to the Humanitarian Exception.



257. To which jurisdictions does the significant reduction exception apply (section 504 of the TRA)?

As of February 6, 2013, 20 jurisdictions have been granted a 180-day significant reduction exception.

The following jurisdictions received their 180-day significant reduction exception to the National Defense Authorization&nbsp;Act&nbsp;(NDAA) sanctions on September 14, 2012: Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, and the United Kingdom.

The following jurisdictions received their 180-day significant reduction exception to NDAA sanctions on December 7, 2012: China, India, Malaysia, Republic of Korea, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, and Turkey. [2-6-2013]



258. What is meant by&nbsp;the TRA&nbsp;section 504 s requirement that bilateral trade consist of trade in goods and services between the country with primary jurisdiction over the foreign financial institution (FFI) and Iran?

OFAC interprets bilateral trade between Iran and the country with primary jurisdiction over the&nbsp;FFI to mean trade in only those goods or services originating in (e.g., produced in or substantially transformed in) 

(i) the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI conducting or facilitating the transaction, or
(ii) Iran (for purposes of the import of Iranian-origin goods or services by the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI),

and the trade in services cannot include brokering transactions involving goods or services from or to third countries.

Furthermore, the goods or services must be exported and sold directly to either the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI (in the case of Iranian-origin goods or services), or Iran (in the case of goods or services originating in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI).

The Humanitarian Exception is not impacted by section 504 s bilateral trade limitations (see FAQ 265). [2-6-2013]



259. What can a foreign financial institution (FFI) do with the funds resulting from the import of Iranian-origin goods or services once the funds are credited to an account? Can funds be transferred to other accounts?

Section 504 of the TRA requires that, in order for a sanctionable transaction to fall within the bounds of the significant reduction exception, any funds owed to Iran as a result of the bilateral trade transaction must be credited to an  account located in the country with primary jurisdiction over the [FFI]. For purposes of implementing this requirement, OFAC interprets the  account located in the country with primary jurisdiction over the [FFI] to be an account in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, and at the same FFI that facilitated the transaction for the importation of goods or services from Iran.

Once the funds are deposited in the FFI, they can be -

(i) used to pay for a purchase by Iran of goods or services originating in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI which are exported and sold directly to Iran, or for the Humanitarian Exception (see Figure 1); or
(ii) transferred to a SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT (see FAQ 260) within that same FFI, in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, where the funds may be later debited to purchase goods or services originating in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI which are exported and sold directly to Iran, or for the Humanitarian Exception (see Figure 2).

The funds may not be repatriated to Iran. [2-6-2013]
&nbsp;

      
      
  

&nbsp;

      
      
  



260. What is a SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT for purposes of the National Defenese Authorization Act's (NDAA) significant reduction exception? 

A SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT is an account set up with conditions and safeguards that require the account to be used only for bilateral trade in goods or services between Iran and the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, and for sales made under the Humanitarian Exception (see FAQ 265). Funds paid as a result of bilateral trade under the NDAA s significant reduction exception may be transferred to a SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT, so long as the account is at the same FFI that facilitated or conducted the original transaction, in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI. [2-6-2013]



261. Are there any circumstances in which funds can be transferred to third-country financial institutions? 

Transfers on or after February 6, 2013, of funds deposited in the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or the SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT to third-country financial institutions are not covered by the National Defense Authorization Act's (NDAA) significant reduction exception, and create exposure to sanctions for FFIs conducting or facilitating such transfers, unless the transfer is to pay a third-country exporter for sales made pursuant to the Humanitarian Exception (see FAQ 265). [2-6-2013]



262. Can funds be withdrawn from the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or a SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT?

In order for&nbsp;the National Defense Authorization Act's (NDAA) significant reduction exception to apply on or after February 6, 2013, funds withdrawn from the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT at the FFI may only be used to pay for bilateral trade or purchases relating to the Humanitarian Exception. Cash withdrawals from the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT would be deemed to fall outside of the scope of bilateral trade and would expose the FFI to sanctions. Bank checks written on the account may be used only to pay for bilateral trade or purchases relating to the Humanitarian Exception, and are subject to further restrictions set out in FAQ 263 below. [2-6-2013]



263. Who can receive payments from funds credited to a RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT?

In order for&nbsp;the National Defense Authorization Act's (NDAA) significant reduction exception to apply on or after February 6, 2013, the person receiving payment (e.g., the manufacturer or service provider) for goods or services being exported to Iran must be 

(i) a citizen, national, or permanent resident of the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI&nbsp;maintaining the accounts containing the bilateral trade funds; or
(ii) an entity organized under the laws of the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI maintaining such accounts.

Furthermore, the person receiving such payment may not be -

(i) the Government of Iran (as defined in 31 CFR Part 561.321) ( GOI );* or
(ii) a financial institution that appears on the List of Foreign Financial Institutions Subject to Part 561, which is maintained on the Office of Foreign Assets Control s Web site (www.treasury.gov/ofac). [2-6-2013]

*The term  Government of Iran as defined in 31 CFR Part 561.321 includes: (a) The state and the Government of Iran, as well as any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof; (b) Any entity owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the foregoing; (c) Any person to the extent that such person is, or has been, or to the extent that there is reasonable cause to believe that such person is, or has been, acting or purporting to act directly or indirectly on behalf of any of the foregoing; and (d) Any person or entity identified by the Secretary of the Treasury to be the Government of Iran under 31 CFR Part 560.



264. Can funds be remitted to Iran or the Government of Iran (GOI) without exposure to sanctions?

No. If funds from the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or the SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT are remitted, directly or indirectly, to Iran, or paid to any person that is the GOI, the&nbsp;FFI would be exposed to sanctions. [2-6-2013]



265. Can the funds be used for sales made under the Humanitarian Exception?

The&nbsp;&nbsp;National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2012&nbsp;(NDAA) generally exempts from sanctions sales made under the Humanitarian Exception (i.e., the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices from third countries to Iran). Funds deposited in the RECIPIENT ACCOUNT or the SPECIAL PURPOSE ACCOUNT can be used to pay for sales made pursuant to the Humanitarian Exception. [2-6-2013]



314. Can an exporter of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices get paid out of a Central Bank of Iran (CBI) account at a foreign financial institution (FFI) in a country with a significant reduction exception, even though the exporter is located in a third-country? Can the third-country exporter s bank handle this transaction?

Yes. So long as the transaction does not involve a designated individual or entity, banks on the Part 561 List located on OFAC s website (http://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/561list.pdf), or otherwise proscribed conduct, such transactions are not sanctionable under U.S. law. Furthermore, there is no requirement under U.S. law that agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices be routed through the country with the significant reduction exception.

Such a payment mechanism is not the exclusive mechanism for the purchase of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices under U.S. law. Other options include receiving payment from a third-country account of the CBI or a non-designated Iranian financial institution.

The Department of the Treasury Office of Foreign Assets Control regulations describe the exception for transactions relating to agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices in 31 CFR § 561.203(g) and Note 2 to 51 CFR § 561.203. Additional information and clarifying guidance about humanitarian assistance and related exports to the Iranian people can be found at /system/files/126/hum_exp_iran.pdf. [6-2013]



266. Does the November 8, 2012 designation of National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) under E.O. 13382 impact the scope of permissible transactions by foreign financial institutions (FFIs) in significantly reducing countries?

Yes. On September 24, 2012, NIOC was identified as an agent or affiliate of Iran s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps ( IRGC ) under section 312 of the TRA , and designated on November 8, 2012, under E.O. 13382 for providing services and support to the IRGC. Accordingly, the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and&nbsp;Divestment Act&nbsp;(CISADA) applies to transactions with NIOC. As a result of these additional sanctions against NIOC, only transactions solely for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from NIOC will fall within the scope of the significant reduction exception. A FFI&nbsp; in a significantly reducing country that is found to knowingly conduct or facilitate other types of significant transactions with NIOC (i.e., transactions unrelated to the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran) would face exposure to CISADA sanctions.

Example 3: If a FFI in a country with a significant reduction exception facilitates a transaction enabling a company in that country to purchase drilling equipment from NIOC, the FFI risks restrictions on, or loss of, correspondent and payable-through account access in the United States, because the transaction was not solely for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran. [2-6-2013]



267. What are definitions for the following NDAA terms:  significant financial transaction,  knowingly,  food, medicine, and medical devices,  foreign financial institution, and  country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI, ? 

These definitions are set out in 31 CFR Part 561. [2-6-2013]




&nbsp;


Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA)


Certain statutory provisions of the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA) were previously implemented through E.O. 13645 of June 3, 2013, which was revoked by E.O. 13716 of January 16, 2016. E.O. 13716, which also carried forward certain IFCA implementation authorities, was revoked by E.O. 13846 of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran . Please be advised that certain provisions of E.O. 13645, including IFCA implementation authorities, have been incorporated into the New E.O. FAQs relating to E.O. 13846 can be found here. FAQs relating to E.O. 13645 have been archived and can be found here.[08-06-18]



&nbsp;

General Questions


313. What is the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA)?

IFCA was signed into law on January 2, 2013, as a part of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013, and provides for several new sanctions related to Iran. IFCA authorizes broad sanctions on: certain activities related to Iran s energy, shipping, and shipbuilding sectors; the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of precious and certain other metals, graphite, coal, and industrial software; the provision of underwriting services, insurance, or reinsurance to activities and persons targeted by U.S. sanctions against Iran; financial transactions involving sanctioned Iranian individuals and entities; and persons involved in the diversion of goods intended for the Iranian people. Most of the IFCA provisions target conduct occurring on or after July 1, 2013.

The U.S. Department of the Treasury will be issuing regulations to implement certain provisions in IFCA. In addition, the U.S. Department of State expects to adopt an interpretation of IFCA similar to that set forth below. [06-03-13]




289. How will the following Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act (IFCA) terms be interpreted:  Iran,  knowingly,  significant, and  transfer ? 


As a general matter, we intend to rely, where applicable, on definitions of terms previously included in Treasury regulations.

 Iran 

The Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (31 CFR part 561) (IFSR) define  Iran as the Government of Iran and the territory of Iran and any other territory or marine area, including the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf, over which the Government of Iran claims sovereignty, sovereign rights, or jurisdiction, provided that the Government of Iran exercises partial or total de facto control over the area or derives a benefit from economic activity in the area pursuant to international arrangements. (31 CFR § 561.329)

 knowingly 

The IFSR define  knowingly with respect to conduct, a circumstance, or a result, to mean that a person has actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the circumstance, or the result. (31 CFR § 561.314)

 significant 

As a general matter, in determining for purposes of IFCA and relevant Executive orders whether transactions, financial transactions, or financial services are significant, the Department of the Treasury will rely on the interpretation set out in §561.404 of the IFSR. The IFSR provide that the Department of the Treasury may consider the totality of the facts and circumstances set forth a list of broad factors that can play a role in the determination whether transactions, financial services, and financial transactions are significant, including: (a) the size, number, and frequency of the transactions, financial services, or financial transactions; (b) the natureof the transactions, financial services, or financial transactions, including their type, complexity, and commercial purpose; (c) the level of awareness of management and whether the transactions are part of a pattern of conduct; (d) the nexus of the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions and blocked persons; (e) the impact of the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions on statutory objectives; (f) whether the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions involve deceptive practices; (g) whether the transactions solely involve the passive holdings of Central Bank of Iran (CBI) reserves or repayment by the CBI of official development assistance or the transfer of funds required as a condition of Iran s membership in an international financial institution; and (h) other relevant factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant. We anticipate adopting a similar approach to interpreting the term  significant as it applies to goods or services. (31 C.F.R.&nbsp;§561.404)&nbsp;

 transfer 

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define  transfer to include import, transshipment, export, or reexport, whether direct or indirect. [08-06-18]



290. Are payments or deliveries that are made on or after July 1, 2013, for contracts that existed prior to July 1, 2013, exempted from IFCA provisions? 

There is no general exception for payments, sales, deliveries, or transfers arising out of contracts entered into prior to July 1, 2013, on or after which date certain activities become sanctionable under IFCA&nbsp;. The assessment of whether such payments are  significant or result in the transfer of  significant goods or services or  significant financial support will be done on a case-by-case basis in line with the criteria discussed above. [06-03-13]



292. What are the implications of IFCA on the provision of humanitarian goods to the people of Iran? 

IFCA generally excepts from sanctions transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran, as set out in more detail in Q&amp;As 297 and 304.[08-06-18]




Sanctions Relating to Iran s Energy, Shipping, and Shipbuilding Sectors

293. What will the  energy, shipping, and shipbuilding sectors of Iran mean for the purposes of IFCA?


We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define  energy sector of Iran to include activities involving the exploration, extraction, production, refinement, or liquefaction of petroleum, natural gas, or petroleum products in Iran. (See also discussion of activities involving natural gas in Q&amp;A 297.)

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define  shipping sector of Iran to include activities involving the transportation of goods by seagoing vessels, including oil tankers and cargo vessels, flying the flag of the Islamic Republic of Iran, or owned, controlled, chartered, or operated directly or indirectly by the Government of Iran.

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define  shipbuilding sector of Iran to include activities involving the construction of seagoing vessels, including oil tankers and cargo vessels, in Iran. [08-06-18]



294. How will I know if someone is part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors or is a port operator in Iran?

Persons determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors, or a port operator in Iran for purposes of&nbsp;IFCA&nbsp;section 1244(c) will be identified as such on the SDN List. Knowingly providing certain significant support to persons determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors, or a port operator in Iran will have exposure to sanctions, unless the transaction is excepted (see also Q&amp;A 297). [06-03-13]



295. What are goods or services used in connection with Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors for purposes of IFCA section 1244(d)(3)?

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define goods and services used in connection with Iran s energy, shipping and shipbuilding sectors to include:

a. Energy Sector: In the case of Iran s energy sector, goods or services that contribute to,


	Iran s ability to develop its domestic petroleum resources;
	
	
	The maintenance or expansion of Iran s domestic production of petroleum products; and
	
	
	Iran s ability to import or export petroleum or petroleum products.
	
b. Shipping Sector: In the case of Iran s shipping sector,


	The provision of crude and product tankers to Iran;
	
	
	The provision of registry, flagging, or classification services of any kind;
	
	
	The supervision of and participation in the repair of ships and their parts;
	
	
	The inspection, testing, and certification of marine equipment materials and components;
	
	
	The carrying out of surveys, inspections, audits and visits, and the issuance, renewal or endorsement of the relevant certificates and documents of compliance, as they relate to ships and shipping; and
	
	
	Any other goods or services relating to the maintenance, supply, bunkering, and docking of vessels flying the flag of the Islamic Republic of Iran, or owned, controlled, chartered, or operated directly or indirectly by, or for or on behalf of the Government of Iran&nbsp;(GOI) or an Iranian person.
	
c. Shipbuilding Sector: In the case of Iran s shipbuilding sector,


	The building and refit of vessels;
	
	
	The provision or refit of items such as (i) steam turbines and their parts for marine propulsions, (ii) marine propulsion engines and parts used solely or principally with them, (iii) other gas turbines for marine propulsion, (iv) ship or boat propellers and blades, and (v) direction finding compasses and other navigational instruments and appliances solely for the maritime industry;
	
	
	Other goods used in connection with building and propulsion of vessels; and
	
	
	Technical assistance and training relating to, and financing of, the building, maintenance or re-fitting of vessels.
	
Sections 1244(d)(1) and (2) of IFCA make sanctionable certain transactions for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of such goods and services if they are significant goods or services used in connection with Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors. (See Q&amp;A 289 above for an interpretation of  significant. ) The provision of goods or services identified above could be sanctionable regardless of whether any person involved in the transaction has been determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors. [06-03-13]



296. Will the provision of bunkering services to a non-Iranian vessel carrying non-sanctionable goods to or from Iran be subject to sanctions?

If a non-Iranian vessel is transporting non-sanctionable goods to or from Iran, the bunkering of that non-Iranian vessel in a country other than Iran  and related payments for these bunkering services  will not be subject to sanctions, only if (1) the transaction either does not involve U.S. persons (including U.S. financial institutions) or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, or the transaction is exempt from OFAC regulation or authorized by OFAC if it does involve U.S. persons (including U.S. financial institutions) or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, and (2) the transaction does not involve persons on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) that have been designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including designated Iranian financial institutions or the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), or activity that is subject to other sanctions authorities. [09-05-2019]



691. Will the provision of bunkering services to a non-Iranian vessel carrying sanctionable goods to or from Iran be subject to sanctions?

If a non-Iranian vessel is transporting sanctionable goods to or from Iran (including, but not limited to, petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemical products from Iran; goods used in connection with the automotive sector of Iran; or iron, iron products, aluminum, aluminum products, steel, steel products, copper, or copper products from Iran), bunkering of that non-Iranian vessel in a country other than Iran  and related payments for these bunkering services  risk being subject to sanctions unless an applicable waiver or exception applies. For example, persons providing bunkering services to a non-Iranian vessel transporting petroleum or petroleum products from Iran could be designated under subsection 1(a)(ii) of E.O. 13846 if such activities involve the provision of material support for, or goods or services to or in support of, NIOC or NICO. Persons that knowingly provide bunkering services to a non-Iranian vessel carrying only petroleum or petroleum products from Iran could likewise be sanctioned under section 3(a)(ii) of E.O. 13846 if that transaction is determined to be a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of those items. [09-05-2019]



692. Will the provision of bunkering services for an Iranian vessel be subject to sanctions?

Section 1244(d)(1) of IFCA makes sanctionable knowingly selling, supplying, or transferring to or from Iran significant goods or services used in connection with Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors. (See FAQ 289 above for an interpretation of  significant. ) The provision of bunkering services to a vessel flying the flag of the Islamic Republic of Iran, or owned, controlled, chartered, or operated directly or indirectly by, for, or on behalf of the Government of Iran (GOI) or an Iranian person, could be sanctionable under this authority, regardless of whether the transaction involves persons that have been determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors pursuant to Section 1244(c) of IFCA. Likewise, pursuant to section 1244(d)(2) of IFCA, a foreign financial institution could be exposed to sanctions if it knowingly conducts or facilitates a significant financial transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of goods or services used in connection with Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors. Payments for the provision of bunkering services to a vessel flying the flag of the Islamic Republic of Iran or owned, controlled, chartered, or operated directly or indirectly by, for, or on behalf of the GOI or an Iranian person could be sanctionable under this authority, regardless of whether the transaction involves persons that have been determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors pursuant to Section 1244(c) of IFCA. (See FAQ 295).

In addition, non-U.S. persons that provide bunkering services for an Iranian vessel that has been identified as blocked property of an Iranian person on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons  or that make related payments for these bunkering services  risk being designated themselves

However, the provision of bunkering services for an Iranian vessel transporting goods subject to an exception, such as agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices, to Iran, or subject to an applicable waiver  and the making of related payments for these bunkering services  will not be exposed to sanctions, unless the transactions involve persons on the SDN List that have been designated under E.O. 13224 or E.O. 13382 in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including certain designated Iranian financial institutions or the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), as described in section 104(c)(2)(E) of CISADA, or activity that is subject to other sanctions authorities. [09-05-2019]



297. Are there any exceptions to the sanctions provisions of section 1244 of IFCA? 

The following transactions are excepted from the provisions of section 1244 of IFCA.

a. Transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran or for the provision of humanitarian assistance to the people of Iran.

b. The export of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran to a country with a significant reduction exception under section 1245(d)(4)(D)(i) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012&nbsp;(NDAA 2012).&nbsp;

c. A significant financial transaction conducted or facilitated by a foreign financial institution (FFI), provided that a significant reduction exception under 1245(d)(4)(D)(i) of NDAA 2012 applies to the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI and the financial transaction is for trade in goods or services (i) between Iran and the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI and (ii) not otherwise subject to sanctions under the law of the United States, and any funds owed to Iran as a result of the trade are credited to an account located in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI. We anticipate the implementation of these trade requirements to be similar to the trade requirements set forth in the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(IFSR), in particular 31 CFR §561.203(j) and 31 CFR §561.203(k).

d. The sale, supply, or transfer of natural gas to or from Iran. IFCA&nbsp;section 1244, however, does set out sanctions that may apply to FFIs that conduct or facilitate a transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer of natural gas to or from Iran unless the financial transaction is for trade in goods or services (i) between Iran and the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI and (ii) not otherwise subject to sanctions under the law of the United States, and any funds owed to Iran as a result of the trade are credited to an account located in the country with primary jurisdiction over the FFI. We anticipate the implementation of these trade requirements to be similar to the trade requirements set forth in the IFSR, in particular 31 CFR §561.203(j) and 31 CFR §561.203(k).

e. Certain activities relating to the pipeline project to supply natural gas from the Shah Deniz gas field in Azerbaijan to Europe and Turkey. [08-06-18]



315. Will routine payments or fees be subject to sanctions if they are made to a person determined to be a port operator in Iran and if the vessel is carrying non-sanctioned goods?

Any company involved in loading or unloading cargo in Iran should exercise great caution to avoid engaging in transactions with entities designated by the United States, including the Tidewater Middle East Co. which was designated for its involvement in Iran s proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. However, to the extent that a shipping company transacts with port operators in Iran that have been identified as such under IFCA but not otherwise designated, and as long as such payments are limited strictly to routine fees including port dues, docking fees, or cargo handling fees, paid for the loading and unloading of non-sanctioned goods at Iranian ports, we anticipate that such transactions would not be considered significant transactions for the purposes of IFCA. Non-routine and/or large payments or fees that materially exceed standard industry rates could expose a person to sanctions. Furthermore, providing any port operator in Iran with any significant financial, material, technological, or other support could expose a person to sanctions. [08-06-18]




Sanctions Relating to the Sale, Supply, or Transfer of Certain Materials to or from Iran (relating to IFCA)IFCA provides for sanctions involving the sale, supply, or transfer of certain materials to or from Iran.

&nbsp;


298. For purposes of IFCA, what materials are considered graphite, raw or semi-finished metals?

For purposes of IFCA, we anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define graphite, raw or semi-finished metals described in section 1245(d) of IFCA to include steels; aluminum metal and its alloys; base metals of single or complex borides of titanium; beryllium metal and its alloys; boron metal and its alloys; cobalt metal and its alloys; copper infiltrated tungsten metal; copper-beryllium metal; germanium metal and its alloys; graphites; hastelloy; inconel; magnesium metal and its alloys; molybdenum metal and its alloys; neptunium-237 metal and its alloys; nickel metal and its alloys; nickel aluminide metals; niobium metal and its alloys; niobium-titanium filaments; plutonium metal and its alloys; porous nickel metal; silver infiltrated tungsten metal; tantalum metal and its alloys; tellurium metal and its alloys; titanium aluminide metals; titanium metal and its alloys; tungsten metal, tungsten carbide metal, and their alloys; uranium titanium alloy metals; and zirconium metal and its alloys and compounds. [06-03-13]



299. For purposes of IFCA, what are considered precious metals? 

For purposes of IFCA, we anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will define the term  precious metals to include silver (including silver plated with gold or platinum, unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form); gold (including gold plated with platinum, unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form); base metals or silver, clad with gold, not further worked than semi-manufactured; platinum, unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form; iridium; osmium; palladium; rhodium; ruthenium; base metals, silver or gold, clad with platinum, not further worked than semi-manufactured; waste and scrap of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metals, other waste and scrap containing precious metal or precious-metal compounds, of a kind used principally for the recovery of precious metal. [06-03-13]



300. For purposes of sanctions under section 1245, how will I know which sectors are controlled by Iran s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps? 

Pursuant to delegated authority, the Secretary of State issues periodic reports pursuant to section 1245(e) of IFCA with respect to which sectors of the Iranian economy are controlled directly or indirectly by Iran s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). Given the opaque business environment in Iran and the significant role that the IRGC plays in the Iranian economy, OFAC recommends that a person considering business in Iran or with Iranian persons conduct due diligence sufficient to ensure that it is not knowingly engaging in transactions with the IRGC, or its officials, agents, or affiliates. [08-06-18]



301. How will the determination be made as to whether materials are used in a manner that would make them subject to sanctions under section 1245 of IFCA? 

A FFI, prior to conducting or facilitating a significant financial transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of the materials listed in 1245(d)  as described in part in Q&amp;A 298 will need to undertake due diligence to ensure that the transaction does not involve the materials being sold, supplied, or transferred, directly or indirectly, to or from Iran for sanctionable uses under section 1245.&nbsp; Pursuant to delegated authority, the Secretary of State issues periodic reports pursuant to section 1245(e) of IFCA, which contains determinations on which materials identified in section 1245(d) are used by Iran as a medium for swap or barter, are listed as assets on the national balance sheet of Iran, or are used in connection with the nuclear, military, or ballistic missile programs of Iran. [08-06-18]



302. Are there any exceptions to section 1245 of IFCA?

A person will not be subject to sanctions under section 1245 of IFCA if a determination is made by the Department of the Treasury or the Department of State, as appropriate, that the person has established and enforced official policies, procedures, and controls to ensure that the person does not sell, supply, or transfer to or from Iran, or facilitate or conduct a significant financial transaction to sell supply, or transfer to or from Iran, materials listed in section 1245 as sanctioned under section 1245. The Department of the Treasury or the Department of State, as appropriate, will make this determination on a case by case basis as part of an investigation or enforcement action by the relevant Department. [06-03-13]




Sanctions Relating to Insurance, Reinsurance, or Underwriting (relating to IFCA) &nbsp;

&nbsp;

303. Which insurance, reinsurance, or underwriting activities are potentially subject to sanctions under IFCA's section 1246(a)(1)? 


A number of insurance activities are subject to sanctions under IFCA, including knowingly providing insurance, reinsurance, or underwriting services to or for Iranian persons on the SDN List to or for any person designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or WMD proliferation, or for activities with respect to Iran for which sanctions have been imposed (e.g., knowingly engaging in a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran). However, the provision of insurance, reinsurance, or underwriting services to non-Iranian persons on the SDN List is generally not sanctionable under section 1246(a)(1) of IFCA if the provision of insurance, reinsurance or underwriting services is not to or for an Iranian person on the SDN List, to or for any person designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or WMD proliferation, or for any activity with respect to Iran for which sanctions have been imposed. [11-27-2019]


304. Are there exceptions to insuring, reinsuring, or underwriting sanctioned activities? 

Yes. IFCA includes the following exceptions to insuring, reinsuring, or underwriting sanctioned activities.

a. Transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran or for the provision of humanitarian assistance to the people of Iran can be insured, reinsured, or underwritten.
b. A person that provides insurance, reinsurance, or underwriting services to sanctioned activity, if a determination is made by the Department of the Treasury or the Department of State, as appropriate, that the person has established and enforced official policies, procedures, and controls to ensure that the person does not underwrite or enter into a contract to provide insurance or reinsurance for activities targeted under section 1246 of IFCA. The Department of the Treasury or the Department of State, as appropriate, will make this determination on a case by case basis as part of an investigation or enforcement action by the relevant Department. [06-03-13]


&nbsp;


Executive Order 13645 of June 3, 2013, &quot;Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 and Additional Sanctions with Respect to Iran&quot;

&nbsp;


E.O. 13645 was revoked by E.O. 13716 of January 16, 2016. Please be advised that certain provisions of E.O. 13645 have been incorporated into E.O. 13846 of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran . FAQs relating to E.O. 13846 can be found here. FAQs relating to E.O. 13645 have been archived and can be found here.


&nbsp;



General Licenses (GL) for Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices in the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations


318. Does the GL for medical devices authorize the exportation or reexportation of all medical devices?

No. The GL for medical devices appearing at section 560.530(a)(3)(i) of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) authorizes covered persons, as defined in section 560.530(e)(4), to export or reexport to Iran medical devices as defined in section 560.530(e)(3) of the ITSR, except for items on the List of Medical Devices Requiring Specific Authorization, which is maintained on OFAC s website. This list will be published in the Federal Register, as will any changes to the list. [12-22-16]



319. Does the GL for medical devices authorize the exportation or reexportation of these items to all entities in Iran?

No. While the GL under section 560.530(a)(3)(i) of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR)&nbsp;authorizes exports or reexports of certain medical devices to most entities in Iran, it does not authorize exports or reexports to military, intelligence, or law enforcement purchasers or importers, nor does it authorize exports or reexports to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked under any of the programs administered by OFAC, except for persons whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599&nbsp;and the ITSR. When engaging in activities pursuant to this GL, exporters and reexporters are expected to undertake due diligence regarding all parties to the transactions, just as they would when acting pursuant to a specific license issued by OFAC. [12-22-16]



361. What items and persons are excluded from the agricultural commodities general license in the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations&nbsp;(ITSR)?

The specified items excluded from the scope of the agricultural commodities general license are: castor beans, castor bean seeds, certified pathogen-free eggs (unfertilized or fertilized), dried egg albumin, live animals (excluding live cattle, shrimp, and shrimp eggs), embryos (excluding cattle embryos), Rosary/Jequirity peas, non-food-grade gelatin powder, peptones and their derivatives, super absorbent polymers, western red cedar, and all fertilizers.

The persons excluded from the scope of the agricultural commodities general license are Iranian military, intelligence, or law enforcement purchasers or importers. In addition, the agricultural commodities general license does not authorize exports or reexports to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked under any of the programs administered by OFAC, except for persons whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to&nbsp;&nbsp;Executive Order 13599and the ITSR.

Exports or reexports involving the excluded items or excluded persons discussed above continue to require the level of review afforded by specific licensing and therefore are not authorized by the agricultural commodities general license. [12-22-16]



362. Is the exportation or reexportation of non-U.S.-origin agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices by a U.S. person to Iran authorized?

Yes. The definitions of the terms  agricultural commodities,  medicine, and  medical device used in the relevant general licenses in the&nbsp;&nbsp;ITSR include, in the case of items subject to&nbsp;Commerce's&nbsp;Export Administration Regulations(EAR), items that are designated as EAR99 and, in the case of items not subject to the EAR, items that would be designated as EAR99 if they were located in the United States. For example, under the agricultural commodities general license, a company located in the United States would be authorized to arrange for the exportation from a third country to Iran of agricultural commodities produced in the third country if those commodities would be designated as EAR99 if they were located in the United States, provided that all conditions of the general license are otherwise satisfied. [12-22-16]



363. Is the exportation or reexportation by non-U.S. persons of agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices that are subject to the Export Administration Regulations&nbsp;(EAR) to Iran authorized?

Yes. A non-U.S. person may export or reexport agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices to Iran under the relevant general licenses in the ITSR, provided that the items are subject to Commerce's&nbsp;Export Administration Regulations(EAR) and all conditions of the relevant general license are otherwise satisfied. For example, a non-U.S. person would be authorized under the medicine and medical devices general license to arrange for the exportation or reexportation to Iran of EAR99 medicines located in the United States or a third country.

In addition, an entity owned or controlled by a U.S. person and established or maintained outside the United States (a  U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity ) may export or reexport agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran under the relevant general licenses in the ITSR (including both items subject to the EAR and items not subject to the EAR), provided that all conditions of the relevant general license are otherwise satisfied. For example, a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity would be authorized under the medicine and medical devices general license to arrange for the reexport to Iran of EAR99 medicines, as well as the export to Iran of medicines not subject to the EAR (e.g., medicines produced outside the U.S. by a non-U.S. person with no controlled U.S. content) that would be designated as EAR99 if they were located in the United States. [12-22-16]



364. Who can apply for a specific license if an export or reexport to Iran is not authorized by general license?

If an export or reexport is not authorized by general license, any U.S. person, or non-U.S. person exporting items subject to&nbsp;Commerce's&nbsp;Export Administration Regulations EAR and designated as EAR99, wherever located, or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity may apply for a specific license. For example, a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity may apply for a specific license for the export or reexport to Iran of agricultural commodities excluded from the scope of the agricultural commodities general license, such as live animals. [12-22-16]



365. What is authorized with respect to brokerage services related to exports or reexports of agricultural commodities, medicine, or medical devices to Iran?

U.S. persons continue to be authorized to provide brokerage services on behalf of U.S. persons for the sale and exportation or reexportation by U.S. persons of agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran, provided that the sale and exportation or reexportation itself is authorized by either general or specific license. [4-7-2014]



366. Do I still need to come in to OFAC for a specific license to export certain types of agricultural commodities to Iran?

OFAC will no longer issue specific licenses for exports or reexports that are covered by the agricultural commodities general license in the ITSR.

However, a small number of specified agricultural commodities and certain persons are excluded from the agricultural commodities general license and continue to require the level of review afforded by specific licensing. As a result, persons seeking authorization for the exportation or reexportation to Iran of castor beans, castor bean seeds, certified pathogen-free eggs (unfertilized or fertilized), dried egg albumin, live animals (excluding live cattle, shrimp, and shrimp eggs), embryos (excluding cattle embryos), Rosary/Jequirity peas, non-food-grade gelatin powder, peptones and their derivatives, super absorbent polymers, western red cedar, or all fertilizers, or for the exportation or reexportation of any agricultural commodities to Iranian military, intelligence, or law enforcement purchasers or importers, must still apply for a specific license from OFAC.

The agricultural commodities general license in the ITSR also does not authorize exports or reexports to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked under any of the programs administered by OFAC, except for persons whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to&nbsp;&nbsp;Executive Order 13599and the ITSR. [12-22-16]



367. What is the definition of a  bioactive peptide ?

For purposes of the relevant exclusion from the agricultural commodities general license in the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations(ITSR), the term  bioactive peptide means an item that must be less than 50 amino acids in length and bioactive (antioxidant, antiallergic, antimicrobial, antithrombotic, antiatherogenic, hypoglycaemic, anti-inflammatory, antitumor, cytostatic, immunosuppressive properties, or hepatoprotective properties.) [4-7-2014]



Amendments to the General Licenses for the Exportation or Reexportation of Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices to Iran


482. What key changes did the December 23, 2016 regulatory amendment to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) make relating to the exportation and reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran?

The amendment primarily expands the scope of medical devices that can be exported or reexported to Iran without specific authorization. It authorizes the exportation or reexportation to Iran of all items meeting the definition of the term  medical device as defined in section 560.530(e)(3) of the ITSR, except for certain excluded persons as well as certain medical devices that are excluded from the authorization and published on the List of Medical Devices Requiring Specific Authorization. The exportation and reexportation of items on the List of Medical Devices Requiring Specific Authorization or to excluded persons requires a specific license from OFAC. The amendment also adds shrimp and shrimp eggs to the list of agricultural commodities that may be exported to Iran without specific authorization, other than to certain excluded persons.

In addition, the amendment authorizes covered persons to provide training, other than to certain excluded persons, necessary and ordinarily incident to the safe and effective use of agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices exported or reexported pursuant to section 560.530 of the ITSR. It also authorizes the importation into the United States of certain U.S.-origin agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices that were previously exported or reexported to Iran pursuant to the authorizations in section 560.530 of the ITSR and that are broken, defective, or non-operational, or are connected to product recalls, adverse events, or other safety concerns. Additionally, the amendment authorizes the exportation or reexportation to Iran, and storage within Iran for future use, of a limited number of replacement parts for certain medical devices previously exported or reexported to Iran pursuant to an OFAC license to replace broken or non-operational components or where it is ordinarily incident and necessary to proper preventative maintenance of the medical device, and the exportation or reexportation of software and services related to the operation, maintenance, and repair of medical devices. [12-22-16]



483. How does an exporter determine which medical devices need to be specifically licensed by OFAC for exportation or reexportation to Iran?

An exporter should refer to the List of Medical Devices Requiring Specific Authorization, which is maintained on OFAC s website, www.treasury.gov/ofac, on the Iran Sanctions page. An exporter must obtain a specific license from OFAC to export or reexport any medical device on that list to Iran. An exporter must also obtain a specific license for exports to excluded persons as defined in section 560.530(a)(3)(iv) of the ITSR. [12-22-16]



484. What types of training activities are considered to be necessary and ordinarily incident to the safe and effective use of medicine and medical devices?

OFAC considers training activities including the dissemination of product information on the intended use of the device; comparisons of other devices and options; and the manufacturer s instructions for use, labeling, warning, contraindications, storage, and maintenance of the medicine or device to be necessary and ordinarily incident to the safe and effective use of medicines and medical devices. Other examples include training health care professionals to use medical devices safely in order to achieve the desired patient outcome, training on procedures for cleaning and inspecting devices regularly to ensure they are functioning correctly, ongoing training and periodic testing to ensure users stay competent, and training on procedures for adverse events or device failure. [12-22-16]



Licenses Authorizing Exports of Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices

For information regarding&nbsp;licenses authorizing exports of agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran and Sudan pursuant to the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 (TSRA), please see the following topic.



Amendment to the Definition of  Iranian-origin goods or  goods of Iranian origin in the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR)


485. What key changes did the December 23, 2016 regulatory amendment to the Iranian Trade and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) make to the definition of  Iranian-origin goods or  goods of Iranian origin ?

OFAC amended section 560.306 of the ITSR to clarify that the terms  goods of Iranian origin and  Iranian-origin goods do not include the following categories of goods, provided that such goods were not grown, produced, manufactured, extracted, or processed in Iran: (i) goods exported or reexported to Iran under an authorization issued pursuant to the ITSR (e.g., a medical device or a personal communications device exported or reexported to Iran pursuant to a general or specific license issued pursuant to the ITSR) and that subsequently have been reexported from and are located outside of Iran, or (ii) goods transported on a vessel or aircraft that passed though Iranian territorial waters or stopped at a port or place in Iran en route to a destination outside of Iran and that have not otherwise come into contact with Iran. [12-22-16]



486. What is an example of goods otherwise coming into contact with Iran?

Goods have come into contact with Iran, if, for example, they are removed from a port or airport in Iran or are processed through Iranian customs, or if they transit Iran by truck or train en route to a destination outside of Iran. [12-22-16]



487. Are goods that are unloaded from a ship in an Iranian port, put on a truck, and driven out of the boundaries of the port or place of unloading considered to be Iranian-origin goods?

Yes. These goods have otherwise come in contact with Iran and thus do not fall within the carve-out to the definition of Iranian-origin goods or goods of Iranian-origin at section&nbsp;&nbsp;560.306 (b)(2) of the &nbsp;ITSR . However, if these goods are being exported or reexported to Iran under an authorization issued pursuant to the ITSR and they subsequently are reexported from and are located outside of Iran, they would fall within the carve-out to the definition of Iranian-origin goods or goods of Iranian-origin at section 560.306(b)(1) of the ITSR. [12-22-16]



488. Are goods that are unloaded from a ship in an Iranian port, moved within the boundaries of the port, and loaded onto a second ship en route to a destination outside of Iran, without ever leaving the port considered to be Iranian-origin goods?

No, provided that they have not otherwise come in contact with Iran. [12-22-16]






Iranian General License D-1


On May 30, 2013, the Department of the Treasury, in consultation with the Departments of State and Commerce, issued General License D ( GL D ) authorizing the export and reexport to Iran of certain hardware, software, and services incident to personal communications. On February 7, 2014, the Department of the Treasury, in consultation with the Departments of State and Commerce, issued amended Iranian General License D-1 ( GL D-1 ), which clarifies certain aspects of GL D and adds certain new authorizations. Effective February 7, 2014, GL D-1 replaces and supersedes in its entirety GL D.


&nbsp;

General Questions 

&nbsp;


337. What are key changes made by amended General License D-1? 

First, GL D-1 expands the authorization in GL D to permit the exportation, reexportation, or provision, directly or indirectly, to Iran of certain personal communications software, hardware, and related services subject to&nbsp;Commerce's Export Administration Regulations, 15 C.F.R. parts 730 through 774 ( EAR ) (rather than just the exportation or reexportation from the United States or by a U.S. person of such software, hardware, and services). See GL D-1, paragraphs (a)(2)(i) &amp; (a)(3). For purposes of GL D-1, the term  provision could include, for example, an in-country transfer of covered software or hardware. The general license now authorizes, for example, a non-U.S. person located outside the United States to export certain hardware and software subject to the EAR to Iran. See FAQ #341.

Second, GL D-1 adds new authorizations for the exportation, reexportation, or provision, directly or indirectly, by a U.S. person located outside the United States to Iran of certain software and hardware not subject to the EAR. See GL D-1, paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) &amp; (a)(3). The general license now authorizes, for example, a U.S. company to export to Iran, from a location outside the United States, certain hardware or software that is not subject to the EAR (including foreign-origin hardware or software containing less than a de minimis amount of U.S. controlled content). See FAQ #342.

Third, a new Note has been added to paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) clarifying that the authorization in those paragraphs includes the exportation, reexportation, or provision, directly or indirectly, of the authorized items by an individual leaving the United States for Iran. GL D-1 also adds a new authorization for the importation by an individual into the United States of certain hardware and software previously exported by the individual to Iran pursuant to other provisions of GL D-1 or 31 C.F.R. § 560.540. See GL D-1, paragraph (a)(5). The general license now authorizes, for example, an individual to carry a smartphone that falls within the scope of the GL D-1 authorization while traveling to and from Iran. See FAQ #343.

Finally, to further ensure that the sanctions on Iran do not have an unintended chilling effect on the willingness of companies to make available certain publicly available, no cost personal communications tools to persons in that country, GL D-1 adds a new authorization related to the potential recipients of certain publicly available, no cost services and software. See GL D-1, paragraph (a)(6).

Notwithstanding these changes, nothing in this general license relieves an exporter from compliance with the export license requirements of another Federal agency. [02-07-2014]



338. With respect to&nbsp;GL D-1 authorizations in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2), what services and software are covered?

Qualifying services or software must be  incident to the exchange of personal communications over the Internet. In addition, qualifying software under paragraph (a)(2) must meet the stated export control-related criteria. Both paragraphs provide an illustrative but not exhaustive list of the types of services that are authorized:  instant messaging, chat and email, social networking, sharing of photos and movies, web browsing, and blogging. See FAQ #344 and OFAC s Interpretive Guidance and Statement of Licensing Policy on Internet Freedom in Iran (March 20, 2012), available at /system/files/126/internet_freedom.pdf.

Qualifying services or software need not be specifically listed in the Annex in order to be authorized by paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2), provided that they otherwise meet the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2). [02-07-2014]



339. With respect to&nbsp;GL D-1&nbsp;authorization in paragraph (a)(3), do exporters need to make a determination as to whether an export of an item or service listed in the Annex to GL D-1 is  incident to personal communications ? 

No. The Annex lists software, hardware, and related services determined to be  incident to personal communications for purposes of the authorization in paragraph (a)(3) of GL D-1. [02-07-2014]



340. What should I do if I am unsure whether an item or service is covered by GL D-1?

If you require assistance interpreting the authorizations contained in GL D-1 and how they apply to your situation, please contact OFAC s Licensing Division online at https://licensing.ofac.treas.gov/Apply/Introduction.aspx, by phone at 202-622-2480, or by email at ofac_feedback@do.treas.gov. [02-07-2014]



341. May a non-U.S. person export, reexport, or provide to Iran hardware and software that is subject to&nbsp;Commerce's Export Administration Regulations&nbsp;(EAR) pursuant to GL D-1?

Yes, for purposes of the authorities administered by OFAC, amendments made by GL D-1 authorize the exportation, reexportation, or provision of certain hardware and software subject to the EAR by non-U.S. persons outside the United States. See GL D-1, paragraphs (a)(2)(i) &amp; (a)(3). For example, a non-U.S. person manufacturer of smartphones that are (a) subject to the EAR because they contain more than a de minimis amount of U.S. controlled content and (b) within the scope of the GL D-1 authorization may export the smartphones from its third-country manufacturing facility directly or indirectly to Iran. See FAQ #337. [02-07-2014]



342. Does GL D-1 authorize U.S. persons located outside the United States to export or reexport to Iran certain specified hardware or software that is not subject to Commerce's Export Administration Regulations (EAR)? 

Yes. Amendments made by GL D-1 authorize the exportation, reexportation, or provision to Iran by U.S. persons located outside of the United States of certain specified hardware and software items that are not subject to the EAR. See GL D-1, paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) &amp; (a)(3). GL D-1 also extends this authorization to an entity owned or controlled by a U.S. person and established or maintained outside the United States ( a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity ), subject to the conditions set forth in 31 C.F.R. § 560.556. See GL D-1, Note 2 to paragraph (a). Under these amendments, for example, an overseas branch of a U.S. company or a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity may export to Iran, from a location outside the United States, certain hardware or software that is not subject to the EAR (including foreign-origin hardware or software containing less than a de minimis amount of U.S. controlled content) if the hardware or software is within the scope of the GL D-1 authorization. These amendments also authorize the exportation, reexportation, or provision of certain fee-based software that is not subject to the EAR because it is described in section 734.3(b) of the EAR. See FAQ #337. Section 734.3(b) of the EAR describes  publicly available software for purposes of those regulations. [02-07-2014]



343. Does GL D-1 authorize the exportation to Iran and importation into the United States of personal communication devices by persons travelling from the United States to Iran and back to the United States?

Yes. As amended, GL D-1 authorizes both the exportation, reexportation, or provision to Iran and the importation into the United States by an individual entering the United States directly or indirectly from Iran, of software authorized by 31 C.F.R. § 560.540 paragraph (a)(2) and software and hardware authorized by paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of GL D-1, provided that the items were previously exported, reexported, or provided by the individual to Iran. See GL D-1, paragraph (a)(5) and the Note to paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3). See FAQ #337. [02-07-2014]



344. How do the authorizations in paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(6) of GL D-1 compare to the previously existing general license in 31 C.F.R. § 560.540 authorizing certain services and software incident to Internet-based communications? 

The general license in § 560.540 authorizes the exportation from the United States or by U.S. persons, wherever located, to persons in Iran of no-cost services incident to the exchange of personal communications over the Internet and no-cost software necessary to enable such services. Please also see OFAC s Interpretive Guidance and Statement of Licensing Policy on Internet Freedom in Iran (March 20, 2012). See /system/files/126/internet_freedom.pdf. Paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of GL D-1 go beyond § 560.540 by, among other things, authorizing fee-based services and software incident to the exchange of personal communications over the Internet.

In addition, to further ensure that the sanctions on Iran do not have an unintended chilling effect on the willingness of companies to make available certain publicly available, no cost personal communications tools to persons in Iran, pursuant to paragraph (a)(6) of GL D-1, the exportation, reexportation, or provision to the Government of Iran of certain publicly available, no-cost services and software described in § 560.540(a) or categories (6) through (11) of the Annex to GL D-1 is authorized. U.S. persons continue generally to be prohibited from exporting goods and services to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V, other than Government of Iran end-users blocked solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599. See GL D-1 paragraph (b)(2). Prohibited end-users include Iranian persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to OFAC authorities relating to WMD proliferation, terrorism, and human rights abuses. In addition, GL D-1 does not authorize any action or activity involving any item (including information) subject to Commerce's&nbsp;Export Administration Regulations&nbsp;(EAR) that is prohibited by, or otherwise requires a license under, part 774 of the EAR or participation in any transaction involving a person whose export privileges have been denied pursuant to part 764 or 766 of the EAR, without authorization from the Department of Commerce. [02-07-2014]



345. How can U.S. companies arrange for payment from Iran for exports authorized under GLD-1? 

In general, the payment requirements under GL D-1 are the same as for all other general licenses under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations ( ITSR ). Section 560.516 of the ITSR authorizes U.S. depository institutions to process transfers of funds to or from Iran, or for the direct or indirect benefit of persons in Iran or the Government of Iran, if the transfer arises from, and is ordinarily incident and necessary to give effect to, an underlying transaction that has been authorized by a specific or general license issued pursuant to the ITSR and does not involve debiting or crediting an Iranian account. 31 C.F.R. § 560.516(a). [02-07-2014]



346. What kind of due diligence is required for the exportation of fee-based services, software, or hardware authorized by GL D-1?

Due diligence programs should be tailored to the particular risks encountered by exporters. As a general matter, companies selling fee-based services, software, or hardware authorized by GL D-1 should undertake reasonable, risk-based measures designed to ensure that they do not export their products to persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any sanctions program administered by OFAC, regardless of whether the Government of Iran or other end-user appears on OFAC s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (or any of OFAC's other sanctions lists). [02-07-2014]



347. Are there any restrictions as to the use of the Farsi language in authorized advertising or software?

U.S. sanctions on Iran do not impose any restrictions as to the use of the Farsi language. [02-07-2014]



348. May U.S. persons employ agents in Iran to facilitate sales, create or fund a physical sales presence on the ground in Iran, or utilize Iranian commercial marketing services in furtherance of exports authorized under GL D-1?

No. GL D-1 does not authorize the employment of persons in Iran to facilitate sales, the maintenance of a physical sales presence in Iran, or the utilization of Iranian marketing services. However, certain copy-ready advertising materials are exempt from the prohibitions of the ITSR to the extent they qualify as information or informational materials pursuant to 31 C.F.R. § 560.210(c). [02-07-2014]

&nbsp;




&nbsp;

Specific Software, Hardware, and Services Covered by General License D-1 for Iran

For additional information regarding specific software, hardware, and services in Iran, please see the following topic.&nbsp;




Payments or the Facilitation of Payments to Iranian Civil Aviation Authorities for Overflights of Iran or Landing in Iran



417. Are payments or the facilitation of payments not involving U.S. persons to Iranian civil aviation authorities for overflights of Iran or landing in Iran by aircraft that are owned by a non-U.S. person and registered outside the United States sanctionable under U.S. law?
No.&nbsp; Provided that the relevant transactions do not involve the U.S. financial system or persons on the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), payments of charges for services rendered by the Government of Iran in connection with the overflight of Iran or landing in Iran of aircraft owned by a non-U.S. person and registered outside the United States are not subject to sanctions under U.S. law.&nbsp; The involvement of persons on the SDN List, including Iranian financial institutions or airlines designated pursuant to Executive Order 13224 or Executive Order 13382, would create sanctions exposure for participants to such transactions.
U.S. persons and U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities cannot participate in transactions related to the payment of overflight or landing fees to the Government of Iran, nor can such transactions transit the U.S. financial system, unless the transactions fall within the scope of 31 C.F.R. § 560.522 or a specific license issued by OFAC and the payments in connection with such authorized transactions are consistent with 31 C.F.R. § 560.516.&nbsp; &nbsp;[11-05-2018]




Provision of Routine Goods and Services by non-U.S. persons to Diplomatic Missions of the Government of Iran 



455. Is the provision of routine goods and services by non-U.S. persons to diplomatic missions of the Government of Iran located outside the United States sanctionable under U.S. law?

The provision of goods and services for the conduct of the official business of the diplomatic missions of the Government of Iran located outside the United States or for the personal use of the employees of the missions, including financial services such as the opening of a bank account, by a non-U.S. person would not be sanctionable under U.S. law, provided that such goods and services do not involve persons on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (other than any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality of the Government of Iran listed solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599 or any Iranian depository institution listed solely pursuant to Executory Order 13599) or other activities that would be sanctionable under U.S. law.

Further, the provision of goods and services to the diplomatic missions of the Government of Iran outside the United States cannot involve U.S. persons or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, or the provision to the Government of Iran of goods, technology, or services subject to the prohibitions of 31 C.F.R. §§ 560.204-205, nor can related transactions transit the U.S. financial system, unless the activities and/or transactions are authorized by OFAC. [10-22-2015]




Additional Iran-related Questions From Financial Institutions



37. My bank operates accounts for individuals living in Iran. OFAC has told us that these accounts cannot be operated. Does this mean that the accounts are blocked?

No, the accounts are restricted. The Iranian sanctions prohibit the export of goods or services to Iran. By operating an account for an individual or company in Iran, the bank would be exporting services to that person or entity in violation of the Iranian Transactions Regulations. The accounts, however, are not blocked. The account holder can close the account and have the funds transferred to his or her account outside the United States. [09-10-02]



38. Are U-Turn payments for Iran still permitted?

No, as of November 10, 2008 U-Turn payments are no longer allowed. [11-10-08]



118. I have a client that is in Iran to visit a relative. Do I need to restrict the account?

No. As long as you are satisfied that the client is not ordinarily resident in IRAN, then the account does not need to be restricted. [07-28-09]



54. I have an account with a W-8 showing an address in Iran. Is the account automatically restricted?

In the absence of information proving to your satisfaction that the account holder is not in Iran, you should consider the account restricted based on the W-8 filing. [06-24-05]


Countering America s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) Section 105




533. What are the requirements of CAATSA section 105 related to the imposition of sanctions on the IRGC, and how are those requirements being implemented? 


On August 2, 2017, the President signed into law the  Countering America s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (Public Law 115-44) (CAATSA), which, among other things, imposes new sanctions on Iran. Section 105 of CAATSA requires the imposition of sanctions applicable pursuant to the global terrorism Executive Order 13224 on Iran s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and foreign persons that are officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC. Consistent with that requirement of CAATSA, OFAC designated the IRGC on October 13, 2017, pursuant to E.O. 13224 for providing support to the IRGC-Qods Force, which previously had been designated for its support to various terrorist groups. In addition, effective October 31, 2017, OFAC amended the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594, to block the property and interests in property of foreign persons that have been identified by OFAC as officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC. [10/30/2017]





534. Before October 13, 2017, wasn t the IRGC already subject to sanctions?&nbsp; What s different about applying terrorism-related sanctions to the IRGC and foreign persons that are officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC?


Before October 13, 2017, the IRGC was blocked under Executive Order 13382(relating to WMD proliferation), 13553 (relating to Iranian human rights abuses), and 13606 (relating to Iranian and Syrian human rights abuses via information technology), and persons who engaged in certain activity involving the IRGC were already subject to secondary sanctions. OFAC s October 13, 2017 action designating the IRGC under E.O. 13224 (relating to counterterrorism) and OFAC s October 31, 2017 action under the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594 (GTSR), to block the property and interests in property of foreign persons that have been identified by OFAC as officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC carry additional consequences that limit certain activities with respect to the IRGC and foreign persons identified by OFAC as officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC.&nbsp; Certain exemptions available under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) relating to personal communications, humanitarian donations, information or informational materials, and travel do not apply to transactions with persons designated under E.O. 13224 or otherwise blocked pursuant to the GTSR, which include the IRGC and foreign persons that have been identified by OFAC as officials, agents, or affiliates of the IRGC. &nbsp;[10/30/2017]





Guidance Related to&nbsp;Humanitarian Assistance with Regard to the November 12, 2017 Earthquake in Iran


549. In light of the recent earthquake in Iran, how can I help the Iranian people while making sure to abide by U.S. sanctions?


In light of the tragic earthquake in Iran, the Department of the Treasury s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) would like to highlight some of the ways in which Americans can provide humanitarian assistance to the Iranian people, consistent with the Iran-related sanctions administered by OFAC.&nbsp;

General License E, issued by OFAC in 2013 pursuant to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR), authorizes nongovernmental organizations to export services to Iran in support of activities related to humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs in Iran, including the provision of relief services related to natural disasters, the provision of donated health-related services, and the distribution of donated articles (such as food, clothing, and medicine) intended to be used to relieve human suffering in Iran.&nbsp; In addition, nongovernmental organizations are authorized to transfer up to $500,000 per year in support of these activities, subject to certain conditions, including reporting requirements.&nbsp;

U.S. individuals may raise funds outside of Iran in support of relief services provided by nongovernmental organizations pursuant to General License E, and may make financial donations to such nongovernmental organizations in support of authorized activities.&nbsp; General License E does not, however, authorize U.S. individuals to transfer financial donations directly to Iran or nongovernmental organizations in Iran or to organize disaster relief services in Iran such as fire, rescue, or medical services.&nbsp; U.S. persons interested in doing so should consider working through a nongovernmental organization in order to conduct such activity.&nbsp;

In addition, donations of articles such as food, clothing, and medicine intended to be used to relieve human suffering are exempt from the sanctions on trade between the United States and Iran, as long as the donations are not being sent to the Government of Iran or any Iranian individual or entity on the List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List).&nbsp;

Finally, U.S. financial institutions are authorized to process noncommercial, personal remittances to Iran, which may include a personal transfer of funds from the United States to Iran to assist a friend or family member, provided that the transfer complies with the requirements of sections 560.516 and 560.550 of the ITSR. [11-17-2017]





Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Executive Order of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran


597. What is the purpose of Executive Order (E.O) of August 6, 2018,  Reimposing Certain Sanctions With Respect to Iran ?

In accordance with his May 8, 2018 decision to cease the United States participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and to reimpose all of the U.S. sanctions lifted or waived in connection with the JCPOA, the President issued E.O. 13846 on August 6, 2018 to reimpose relevant provisions of E.O. 13574 of May 23, 2011; E.O. 13590 of November 20, 2011; E.O. 13622 of July 30, 2012; and E.O. 13645 of June 3, 2013, that had been revoked by E.O. 13716 of January 16, 2016. Consistent with guidance issued by the Department of the Treasury on May 8, 2018&nbsp;, E.O. 13846 reimposes specified sanctions relating to Iran following relevant wind-down periods, i.e., on or after August 7, 2018 or November 5, 2018, depending on the activity involved. In addition, to provide clarity and consolidate relevant authorities into a single E.O., E.O. 13846 revokes E.O.s 13716 and 13628 and continues in effect sanctions authorities provided for in those E.O.s. E.O. 13846 also broadens the scope of certain provisions contained in those E.O.s, as outlined in FAQ 601 below. [08-06-2018]



598. What does E.O. 13846 do?

E.O. 13846 reimposes relevant blocking sanctions, correspondent and payable-through account sanctions, and menu-based sanctions previously provided for in E.O.s 13574, 13590, 13622, and 13645, which were revoked by E.O. 13716, and continues in effect sanctions authorities provided for in E.O.s 13628 and 13716. As incorporated into E.O. 13846, these measures include implementing authority for and additional tools related to: the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996, as amended (ISA), the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability and Divestment Act of 2010, as amended (CISADA), the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (TRA), and the Iran Freedom Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA) (see FAQ 605). As a general matter, E.O. 13846 incorporates exceptions to these sanctions, including for transactions for the provision of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran, to the same extent such exceptions applied under the prior E.O.s. E.O. 13846 also broadens the scope of certain provisions contained in those E.O.s, as outlined in FAQ 601 below.

Section 1 of E.O. 13846 authorizes blocking sanctions on persons determined:

i. On or after August 7, 2018, to have provided material support for, or goods or services in support of, the purchase or acquisition of U.S. bank notes or precious metals by the Government of Iran (GOI) (subsection 1(a)(i));
ii. On or after November 5, 2018, to have provided material support for, or goods or services in support of, the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), the Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO), or the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) (subsection 1(a)(ii));
iii. On or after November 5, 2018, to have provided material support for, or goods or services in support of:

a. Any Iranian person on the List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) (other than an Iranian depository institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599) (subsection 1(a)(iii)(A)); or
b. Any other person on the SDN List whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to subsection 1(a) of E.O. 13846 or E.O. 13599 (other than an Iranian depository institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599) (subsection 1(a)(iii)(B)); or

iv. Pursuant to the relevant statutory authorities in IFCA, to be:

a. Part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors (subsection 1(a)(iv)(A));
b. A port operator in Iran (subsection 1(a)(iv)(B)); or
c. A person that knowingly provides significant support to a person determined to be part of Iran s energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors, a port operator in Iran, or an Iranian person included on the SDN List (other than a person described in section 1244(c)(3) of IFCA)) (subsection 1(a)(iv)(C)).

Section 2 of E.O. 13846 authorizes correspondent and payable-through account sanctions on foreign financial institutions (FFIs) determined to have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction:


i. On or after August 7, 2018, for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with Iran's automotive sector (subsection 2(a)(i));
ii. On or after November 5, 2018, on behalf of an Iranian person on SDN List (other than an Iranian depository institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599) or any other person on the SDN List whose property is blocked pursuant to subsection 1(a) of E.O. 13846 or E.O. 13599 (other than an Iranian depository institution whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599) (subsection 2(a)(ii));
iii. On or after November 5, 2018, with NIOC or NICO, except for the sale or provision to NIOC or NICO of the products described in section 5(a)(3)(A)(i) of ISA provided that the fair market value of such products is lower than the applicable dollar threshold specified in that provision (subsection 2(a)(iii));
iv. On or after November 5, 2018, for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran (subsection 2(a)(iv)); and
v. On or after November 5, 2018, for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petrochemical products from Iran (subsection 2(a)(v)).

Section 3 of E.O. 13846 authorizes menu-based sanctions on persons determined to:

i. Have knowingly engaged, on or after August 7, 2018, in a significant transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with Iran s automotive sector (subsection 3(a)(i));
ii. Have knowingly engaged, on or after November 5, 2018, in a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran (subsection 3(a)(ii));
iii. Have knowingly engaged, on or after November 5, 2018, in a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petrochemical products from Iran (subsection 3(a)(iii)); or
iv. Be a successor entity to a person determined to meet any of the criteria set out in subsections 3(a)(i)-(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846&nbsp;(subsection 3(a)(iv)); or
v. Own or control a person determined to meet any of the criteria set out in subsections 3(a)(i)-(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846 and to have had knowledge that the person engaged in the activities referred to in the relevant subsection (subsection 3(a)(v)); or
vi. Be owned or controlled by, or under common ownership or control with, a person determined to meet any of the criteria set out in sections 3(a)(i)-3(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846, and knowingly engaged in the activities referred to in the relevant subsection (subsection 3(a)(vi)).

Section 4 of E.O. 13846 provides authority for the heads of relevant agencies of the U.S. government to implement the menu-based sanctions provided for in section 3.

Section 5 of E.O. 13846 provides authority for the Treasury Department to implement the menu-based sanctions provided for in ISA, CISADA, TRA, IFCA, and section 3 of E.O. 13846

Section 6 of E.O. 13846 authorizes correspondent or payable-through account sanctions or blocking sanctions on FFIs that are determined to have, on or after August 7, 2018: (a) knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant transaction related to the purchase or sale of Iranian rials or a derivative, swap, future, forward, or other similar contract whose value is based on the exchange rate of the Iranian rial (subsection 6(a)(i)); or (b) maintained significant funds or accounts outside the territory of Iran denominated in the Iranian rial (subsection 6(a)(ii)).

Section 7 of E.O. 13846 carries forward sections 2 and 3 of E.O. 13628 and subsection 3(c) of E.O. 13716 (see FAQ 602 below) by providing for blocking sanctions on persons determined to:

i. Have engaged, on or after January 2, 2013, in corruption or other activities relating to the diversion of goods, including agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices, intended for the people of Iran (subsection 7(a)(i));
ii. Have engaged, on or after January 2, 2013, in corruption or other activities relating to the misappropriation of proceeds from the sale or resale of goods described in subsection 7(a)(1) of E.O. 13846 (subsection 7(a)(ii));
iii. Have knowingly, on or after August 10, 2012, transferred or facilitated the transfer of, goods or technologies to Iran, any entity organized under the laws of Iran, or otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the GOI, or any national of Iran for use in or with respect to Iran, that are likely to be used by the GOI or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, or by any person on behalf of the GOI or any such agencies or instrumentalities, to commit serious human rights abuses against the people of Iran (subsection 7(a)(iii));
iv. Have knowingly, on or after August 10, 2012, provided services, including services relating to hardware, software, or specialized information or professional consulting, engineering, or support services with respect to goods or technologies that have been transferred to Iran and that are likely to be used by the GOI or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, or by any person on behalf of the GOI or any such agencies or instrumentalities, to commit serious human rights abuses against the people of Iran (subsection 7(a)(iv));
v. Have engaged in censorship or other activities with respect to Iran, on or after June 12, 2009, that prohibit, limit, or penalize the exercise of freedom of expression or assembly by citizens of Iran, or that limit access to print or broadcast media, including the facilitation or support of intentional frequency manipulation by the GOI or an entity owned or controlled by the GOI that would jam or restrict an international signal (subsection 7(a)(v));
vi. Have materially assisted or provided other support for activities listed in subsections 7(a)(i)-(a)(v) of E.O. 13846 (subsection 7(a)(vi)); or
vii. Be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant section 7 of E.O. 13846 (subsection 7(a)(vii)).

Section 8 of E.O. 13846 continues in effect the sanctions previously contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628, which prohibit an entity owned or controlled by a U.S. person and established or maintained outside the United States (a  U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity ) from knowingly engaging in any transaction, directly or indirectly, with the GOI or any person subject to the jurisdiction of the GOI, if that transaction would be prohibited by specified authorities if engaged in by a U.S. person or in the United States (see FAQs 621-623 below).

Section 9 of E.O. 13846 provides that it revokes and supersedes E.O.s 13628 and 13716 (see FAQ 602 below).

Sections 10-22 of E.O. 13846 contain exceptions, definitions, and other implementing provisions related to the sanctions in the E.O. [08-06-2018]



599. When does E.O. 13846 become effective?

E.O. 13846 is effective at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time (EDT) on August 7, 2018. However, certain sanctions set out in E.O. 13846 apply only to activities that take place on or after November 5, 2018, as set out in FAQ 598 above and in the relevant provisions of E.O. 13846.

E.O. 13846 is being issued to coincide with the end of the 90-day wind down period which started on May 8, 2018. The last day of the 90-day wind-down period is August 6, 2018, and, as announced on May 8, 2018, certain sanctions previously lifted under the JCPOA will be reimposed on August 7, 2018, including sanctions set out in E.O. 13846 (see FAQ 598 above). [08-06-2018]



600. Why does subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13846 take effect before November 5, 2018? 

Subsection 1(a)(iv) authorizes blocking sanctions pursuant to section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA on persons determined to: (A) be part of the energy, shipping, shipbuilding sectors of Iran; (B) operate a port in Iran; or (C) knowingly provide significant support to certain other persons sanctioned pursuant to section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA or an Iranian person on the SDN List. Consistent with the guidance issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury on May 8, 2018, the relevant sanctions in section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA are waived through November 4, 2018 to provide a wind-down period for activities involving Iran that were consistent with the U.S. sanctions relief provided for under the JCPOA. However, the sanctions provided for in section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA targeting significant support to Iranian persons on the SDN List remained in effect even when the JCPOA sanctions relief was in effect. To the extent activities within the scope of section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA involve persons on the SDN List or otherwise sanctionable conduct, persons engaging in such activities could be exposed to sanctions under subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13846 prior to November 5, 2018. [08-06-2018]



601. Does E.O. 13846 expand the scope of sanctions that were in effect prior to January 16, 2016 (Implementation Day of the JCPOA)?

Yes. E.O. 13846 broadens the scope of the sanctions that were in effect prior to January 16, 2016 and provides for greater consistency in the administration of Iran-related sanctions provisions. These added measures are as follows:

i. Subsection 1(a)(iii)(B): Providing new authority for blocking sanctions on persons determined, on or after November 5, 2018, to have provided material support for, or goods and services in support of, persons blocked for:
a. Providing material support for, or goods and services in support of, the purchase or acquisition of U.S. bank notes or precious metals by the GOI (i.e., persons designated pursuant to subsection 1(a)(i));
b. Providing material support for, or goods and services in support of, NIOC, NICO, or CBI (i.e., persons designated pursuant to subsection 1(a)(ii)); or
c. Being part of the energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors of Iran or a port operator in Iran or knowingly providing significant support to certain other persons blocked pursuant to section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA or to an Iranian person on the SDN List (i.e., persons blocked pursuant to subsection 1(a)(iv) for meeting the criteria of section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA).
ii. Subsection 2(a)(ii): Providing new authority for correspondent and payable-through account sanctions on FFIs determined to have, on or after November 5, 2018, knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction on behalf of the persons blocked under the new authorities in subsection 1(a)(iii)(B) described above (i.e., any person blocked pursuant to subsections 1(a)(i), 1(a)(ii), or 1(a)(iv) and included on the SDN List).
iii. Sections 4 and 5: Expanding the menu of sanctions available to impose on persons determined to have, on or after November 5, 2018, knowingly engaged in certain significant transactions relating to petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemicals from Iran (i.e., persons determined to meet the criteria in subsections 3(a)(ii)-(a)(iii) or to be a derivative thereof pursuant to subsections 3(a)(iv)-(a)(vi)) by authorizing the imposition of:
a. Visa restrictions on corporate officers, principals, or controlling shareholders of a sanctioned person (subsection (4)(e));
b. Any of the sanctions from the menu set forth in subsections 4(a)-(e) on principal executive officers of a sanctioned person (subsection 4(f));
c. Prohibitions on U.S. persons investing in or purchasing significant amounts of equity or debt instruments of a sanctioned person (subsection 5(a)(v)); or
d. Any of the sanctions from the menu set forth in subsections 5(a)(i)-(a)(vi) on principal executive officers of a sanctioned person (subsection 5(a)(vii)).
iv. Section 8: Expanding the prohibition on U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities previously contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628 (see FAQs 621-623) by prohibiting transactions with persons blocked for:
a. Providing material support for, or goods and services in support of, Iranian persons on the SDN List and certain other designated persons (i.e., persons designated pursuant to subsection 1(a)(iii)); or
b. Being part of the energy, shipping, or shipbuilding sectors of Iran or a port operator in Iran or knowingly providing significant support to certain other persons blocked pursuant to section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA or to an Iranian person on the SDN List (i.e., persons blocked pursuant to subsection 1(a)(iv) for meeting the criteria of section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA). [08-06-2018]

&nbsp;



602. Why does E.O. 13846 revoke E.O. 13716 and E.O. 13628?

To provide clarity and consolidate relevant authorities into a single document, E.O. 13846 revokes E.O.s 13716 and 13628, and continues in effect relevant provisions from those two revoked E.O.s. Provisions of E.O. 13846 that carry forward relevant provisions of E.O.s 13628 and 13716 include:

&quot; Section 7, which consolidates into a single section designation authorities targeting corruption or other activities relating to the diversion of goods intended for the people of Iran, the transfer of goods or technologies to Iran that are likely to be used by the GOI or any of its agencies or instrumentalities to commit serious human rights abuses against the people of Iran or the provision of certain services with respect to such goods or technologies, and persons engaged censorship in Iran (these provisions previously appeared in sections 2 and 3 of E.O. 13628 and section 8 of E.O. 13645, which was carried forward by subsection 3(c) of E.O. 13716), and

&quot; Section 8 extends certain prohibitions applicable to U.S. persons under OFAC-administered Iran sanctions to U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities and provides for civil penalties on the U.S. parent for any violations of such prohibitions to the same extent that they would apply to a U.S. person for the same conduct, consistent with section 218 of the TRA (this provision was formerly contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628). [08-06-2018]



603. Do persons who were designated pursuant to E.O. 13628 of October 9, 2012,  Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 and Additional Sanctions With Respect to Iran, continue to be subject to sanctions following the issuance of E.O. 13846?

Yes. OFAC&nbsp;is taking&nbsp;action under section 7 of E.O. 13846 to continue in effect the designations of persons who were designated pursuant to E.O. 13628 at the time of the issuance of E.O. 13846 U.S. persons must continue to block the property and interests in property of these individuals and entities, and non-U.S. persons should be aware of the sanctions risk associated with these persons. [08-06-2018]



604. Why do the sanctions set out in E.O.s 13574 and 13590 not appear in E.O. 13846?

The Treasury Department implementation authorities set out in section 1 of E.O. 13574 for  menu-based sanctions under ISA have been superseded by the implementation authorities for  menu-based sanctions under a broader range of authorities that include ISA, CISADA, TRA, and IFCA, and section 3 of E.O. 13846 As a result, section 1 of E.O. 13574 is not included verbatim in E.O. 13846.

The sanctions set out in section 1 of E.O. 13590  relating to development of petroleum resources in Iran and Iran s domestic production of petrochemical products  were incorporated into subsections 5(a)(5)-(a)(6) of ISA by a statutory amendment set forth in section 201 of the TRA. As a result, the sanctions previously set forth in section 1 of E.O. 13590 are not included in E.O. 13846, but remain in place pursuant to statutory authorities. Implementation authorities for the sanctions in subsections 5(a)(5)-(a)(6) of ISA are delegated to the appropriate agency heads through the Presidential Memorandum of October 9, 2012, or through section 5 of E.O. 13846. [08-06-2018]



605. How does E.O. 13846 relate to various Iran-related statutes?

E.O. 13846 implements provisions of, and provides additional tools related to, ISA, CISADA, TRA, and IFCA that were contained in the prior E.O.s. These include:

i. Invoking the President s authority under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to supplement statutory authorities in IFCA with prohibitions or restrictions on the importation of goods;
ii. Continuing to implement the statutory requirements of sections 105A and 105B of CISADA, as added by sections 402 and 403 of TRA, by providing authority to block the property and interests in property and suspend the entry into the United States of persons determined to have engaged in the transfer of goods or technologies to Iran that are likely to be used by the GOI or any of its agencies or instrumentalities to commit serious human rights abuses against the people of Iran or the provision of services with respect to such goods or technology after they are transferred to Iran, and persons determined to have engaged in censorship in Iran; and
iii. Continuing to implement the statutory requirements of section 105C of CISADA, as added by section 1249 of IFCA, by providing authority to block the property and interests in property and suspend the entry into the United States of persons determined to have engaged in corruption or other activities relating to the diversion of goods intended for the Iranian people or the misappropriation of proceeds from the sale or resale of such goods. [08-06-2018]



606. What activity will become sanctionable on or after August 7, 2018 under E.O. 13846 or other authorities?

After the 90-day wind-down period ends on August 6, 2018, the following sanctions come into effect, including under provisions of E.O. 13846 and relevant statutory authorities:

i. Sanctions on the purchase or acquisition of U.S. dollar banknotes by the GOI (see, e.g., subsection 1(a)(i) of E.O. 13846);
ii. Sanctions on Iran s trade in gold or precious metals (see, e.g., subsection 1(a)(i) of E.O. 13846 and subsection 1245(a)(1)(A) of IFCA );
iii. Sanctions on the direct or indirect sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of graphite, raw, or semi-finished metals such as aluminum and steel, coal, and software for integrating industrial processes (see, e.g., section 5 of E.O. 13846 and subsections 1245(a)(1)(B)-(a)(1)(C) and (c) of IFCA);
iv. Sanctions on significant transactions related to the purchase or sale of Iranian rials, or the maintenance of significant funds or accounts outside the territory of Iran denominated in the Iranian rial (see, e.g., section 6 of E.O. 13846);
v. Sanctions on the purchase, subscription to, or facilitation of the issuance of Iranian sovereign debt (see, e.g., section 5 of E.O. 13846 and subsection 213(a) of TRA); and
vi. Sanctions on Iran s automotive sector (see, e.g., subsections 2(a)(i) and 3(a)(i) of E.O. 13846). [08-06-2018]



607. What activity will become sanctionable on or after November 5, 2018 under E.O. 13846 or other authorities?

After the 180-day wind-down period ends on November 4, 2018, the following sanctions come into effect, including under provisions of E.O. 13846 and relevant statutory authorities:

i. Sanctions on Iran s port operators, and shipping and shipbuilding sectors, including on the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL), South Shipping Line Iran, or their affiliates (see, e.g., subsection 1(a)(iv) and section 5 of E.O. 13846 and section 1244(c)(1) of IFCA);
ii. Sanctions on petroleum-related transactions with, among others, NIOC, NICO, and the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC), including the purchase of petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemical products from Iran (see, e.g., subsections 1(a)(ii), 1(a)(iv), 2(a)(iii)-(a)(v), and 3(a)(ii)-(a)(iii) and sections 4 and 5 of E.O. 13846);
iii. Sanctions on transactions by FFIs with the CBI and designated Iranian financial institutions under section 1245 of the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2012 (NDAA 2012) (see, e.g., section 5 of E.O. 13846, section 1245 of NDAA 2012, and subsection 1247(a) of IFCA);
iv. Sanctions on the provision of specialized financial messaging services to the CBI and Iranian financial institutions described in subsection 104(c)(2)(E)(ii) of CISADA (see, e.g., section 5 of E.O. 13846, section 220 of TRA, and subsection 1244(c)(1) of IFCA);
v. Sanctions on the provision of underwriting services, insurance, or reinsurance (see, e.g., section 5 of E.O. 13846, section 5(a)(7) of ISA, subsections 211(a) and 212(a) of TRA, and subsections 1246(a) and 1247(a) of IFCA); and
vi. Sanctions on Iran s energy sector (see, e.g., subsection 1(a)(iv) and section 5 of E.O. 13846, subsection 5(a) of ISA, section 212(a) of TRA, and sections 1244(c)(1), (d) and (h)(2), 1246(a), and 1247(a) of IFCA). [08-06-2018]



Sanctions Relating to Transactions Involving the Iranian Rial 

&nbsp;

608. What transactions involving the Iranian rial are sanctionable under E.O. 13846?

Section 6 of E.O. 13846 reimposes the sanctions previously contained in section 1 of E.O. 13645 with respect to transactions involving the Iranian rial. FFIs risk correspondent and payable-through account sanctions and blocking sanctions if they, on or after August 7, 2018, (i) knowingly conduct or facilitate any significant transaction related to the purchase or sale of Iranian rials or a derivative, swap, future, forward, or other similar contract whose value is based on the exchange rate of the Iranian rial, or (ii) maintain significant funds or accounts outside the territory of Iran denominated in the Iranian rial. [08-06-2018]



Sanctions Relating to Iran s Automotive Sector 

&nbsp;

609. What does E.O. 13846 do with respect to the sanctions on Iran s automotive sector? 

E.O. 13846 reimposes the sanctions previously contained in subsections 3(a)(ii) and section 5 of E.O. 13645 by authorizing the imposition of correspondent and payable-through account sanctions (subsection 2(a)(i)) of E.O. 13846) and menu-based sanctions (subsection 3(a)(i) of E.O. 13846) for certain transactions, on or after August 7, 2018, for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with Iran s automotive sector. [08-06-2018]



610. What is considered Iran s automotive sector for purposes of E.O. 13846?

E.O. 13846 defines the automotive sector of Iran as the manufacturing or assembling in Iran of light and heavy vehicles including passenger cars, trucks, buses, minibuses, pick-up trucks, and motorcycles, as well as original equipment manufacturing and after-market parts manufacturing relating to such vehicles. [08-06-2018]



611. What are goods or services used in connection with Iran s automotive sector for purposes of E.O. 13846? 

E.O. 13846 reimposes sanctions on certain transactions on or after August 7, 2018, for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of  significant goods or services used in connection with the automotive sector of Iran. (See FAQ 289 for an interpretation of the term  significant. )

We anticipate that forthcoming regulations will define  goods or services used in connection with the automotive sector of Iran to include goods or services that contribute to (i) Iran s ability to research, develop, manufacture, and assemble light and heavy vehicles, and (ii) the manufacturing or assembling of original equipment and after-market parts used in Iran s automotive industry. [08-06-2018]



612. Is the sale, supply, or transfer of finished vehicles or  auto kits to Iran sanctionable under the New E.O.?

E.O. 13846 does not make sanctionable the export of finished vehicles to Iran if no further assembly or manufacturing is required. As such, exporting fully assembled and finished vehicles to Iran for sale would not be sanctionable, so long as the transaction is consistent with U.S. sanctions, including that it does not involve a sanctioned person.

In contrast,  auto kits (or  knock-down kits ) exported to Iran for assembly in Iran would be considered goods or services used in connection with the automotive sector of Iran and the export of such kits to Iran would be sanctionable if the transaction is  significant. (See FAQ 289 for an interpretation of the term  significant. ) [08-06-2018]



613. Is the sale, supply, or transfer of goods or services for the maintenance of finished vehicles sanctionable under E.O. 13846?

Goods or services for the maintenance of finished vehicles exported to Iran would generally not be considered  significant goods or services used in connection with the automotive sector of Iran for the purposes of E.O. 13846, and the provision of such goods or services would generally not be sanctionable. However, the export, sale, or distribution of goods (e.g., auto parts and accessories) or services that would contribute to Iran s ability to manufacture or assemble vehicles, or manufacture original equipment and after-market parts in Iran, could create exposure to sanctions. Persons exporting parts and services to Iran for the maintenance or upkeep of finished automobiles, and FFIs facilitating such exports, should exercise caution to ensure that the parts or services are not diverted for the manufacturing or assembly of vehicles in Iran or the manufacturing of original equipment or after-market parts in Iran, and are used only for maintenance and upkeep. [08-06-2018]



Sanctions on Petroleum-related Transactions 

&nbsp;

614. What does E.O. 13846 do with respect to Iran s energy, petroleum, and petrochemical sectors? 

E.O. 13846 reimposes sanctions previously set out in E.O.s 13622, 13628, and 13645 with respect to the Iranian energy, petroleum, and petrochemical sectors. As such, subsections 1(a)(ii) and (2)(a)(ii) of E.O. 13846 authorize blocking sanctions and correspondent or payable-through account sanctions on persons providing material support for, or goods or services to, NIOC or NICO. Separately, subsection 2(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846 authorizes the imposition of correspondent or payable-through account sanctions on an FFI determined to have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction with NIOC or NICO (except for sales of refined petroleum products to NIOC or NICO that are below the dollar threshold that could trigger sanctions under section 5(a)(3)(A)(i) of ISA). Subsections 2(a)(iv)-(a)(v) provide authority to impose sanctions on FFIs determined to have knowingly conducted or facilitated a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemicals from Iran, with the aim of deterring Iran or any other country or institution from establishing workaround payment mechanisms for the purchase of Iranian oil to circumvent the NDAA 2012 oil sanctions. Subsections 3(a)(ii)-(a)(iii) provide authority to impose menu-based sanctions or persons determined to have engaged in a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran. Furthermore, persons that sell, supply, or transfer to or from Iran significant goods or services used in connection with Iran s energy sector are exposed to menu-based sanctions pursuant to subsection 1244(d) of IFCA and section 5 of E.O. 13846 The existing exception rules under NDAA 2012 apply to these sanctions. Thus, countries that are determined by the Secretary of State to have significantly reduced their purchases of Iranian crude oil will be excepted from these measures as well. (See FAQs 169-182 relating to the NDAA 2012 sanctions.)

The provisions in E.O. 13846 reimposing these sanctions come into effect beginning on November 5, 2018. [08-06-2018]



615. Does E.O. 13846 mean that Iran s trade partners should no longer buy petroleum products from Iran? How will this affect exports of Iranian oil?

These measures, which apply to transactions occurring on or after November 5, 2018, establish a key element of the comprehensive Iran sanctions framework by deterring work-around financial transactions involving NIOC or NICO that were not being captured under the sanctions previously implemented against the CBI at the time E.O. 13622 was issued. Iranian trade partners can continue to buy petroleum and petroleum products from Iran without risking sanctions under E.O. 13846&nbsp;if they receive a significant reduction exception under relevant provisions of the NDAA 2012 for the relevant period. However, E.O. 13846 provides authority to sanction, on or after November 5, 2018, the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products and significant dealings with NIOC or NICO by persons in jurisdictions that do not have a significant reduction exception. In addition, IFCA provides for sanctions on persons determined to be part of the energy sector of Iran, or to sell, supply, or transfer to or from Iran significant goods or services used in connection with the energy sector of Iran, provided the person is not in a jurisdiction that has received a significant reduction exception. (See FAQs 293-297 relating to IFCA.) [08-06-2018]



616. Can countries that receive a significant reduction exception under NDAA 2012 purchase oil through NIOC and NICO without facing sanctions?

All property and interests in property of NIOC and NICO subject to U.S. jurisdiction are already blocked pursuant to E.O. 13599, and U.S. persons are prohibited from all dealings with these entities. E.O. 13846 reestablishes the authority previously contained in E.O. 13622 to sanction FFIs that, on or after November 5, 2018, knowingly conduct or facilitate any significant transaction with NIOC or NICO. Financial institutions in jurisdictions that have received a significant reduction exception are not subject to these sanctions for transactions with NIOC and NICO for the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran while the exception applies. In addition, IFCA provides for sanctions on persons that knowingly provide significant financial, material, technological, or other support to, or goods or services in support of any activity or transaction on behalf of or for the benefit of an Iranian person on the SDN List (other than non-designated Iranian financial institutions), provided the person is not in a jurisdiction that has received a significant reduction exception. (See FAQs 293-297&nbsp;relating to IFCA.) [08-06-2018]



617. E.O. 13846 targets transactions between foreign financial institutions and NIOC and NICO. What about a NIOC or NICO subsidiary? Are transactions with those entities also sanctionable under this E.O.?

Yes. As in E.O. 13622, E.O. 13846 defines NIOC and NICO to include any entity owned or controlled by, or operating for or on behalf of, NIOC and NICO. [08-06-2018]



618. Does E.O. 13846 make sanctionable activities related to the pipeline project to supply natural gas from the Shah Deniz gas field in Azerbaijan to Europe and Turkey, given that NICO reportedly has a 10 percent stake in the project? 

No. Section 10 of E.O. 13846 maintains the exceptions previously provided for in E.O. 13622 and E.O. 13645, as well as in subsection 603(a) of the TRA and section 1254 of IFCA, for the pipeline project to supply natural gas from the Shah Deniz gas field in Azerbaijan to Europe and Turkey. [08-06-2018]



619. Are barter arrangements or other non-cash trade transactions involving petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemical products originating from Iran sanctionable under the terms of E.O. 13846?

Yes. To the extent a financial institution is involved, that financial institution could be sanctioned under E.O. 13846 for a barter arrangement, on or after November 5, 2018, related to the purchase or acquisition of petroleum, petroleum products, or petrochemical products from Iran. In addition, barter transactions knowingly conducted with NIOC, NICO, or the CBI also could result in sanctions  regardless of whether a financial institution is involved  to the extent that those transactions constitute material support for, or services to, NIOC, NICO, or the CBI. [08-06-2018]



620. What are the definitions of petroleum products and petrochemical products ? 

The term  petroleum products, as defined in section 16(o) of E.O. 13846, includes unfinished oils, liquefied petroleum gases, pentanes plus, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, residual fuel oil, petrochemical feedstocks, special naphthas, lubricants, waxes, petroleum coke, asphalt, road oil, still gas, and miscellaneous products obtained from the processing of: crude oil (including lease condensate), natural gas, and other hydrocarbon compounds. The term does not include natural gas, liquefied natural gas, biofuels, methanol, and other non-petroleum fuels.

The term  petrochemical products, as defined in section 16(m) of E.O. 13846, includes any aromatic, olefin, and synthesis gas, and any of their derivatives, including ethylene, propylene, butadiene, benzene, toluene, xylene, ammonia, methanol, and urea. [08-06-2018]



U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities

621. What is the prohibition on U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, and how does it work?

Consistent with Section 218 of TRA, section 8 of E.O. 13846 continues in effect the sanctions previously contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628 and expands them to cover activity sanctionable under E.O. 13846 (see FAQ 601). This provision prohibits a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity from knowingly engaging in any transaction, directly or indirectly, with the GOI, or any person subject to the jurisdiction of the GOI, if that transaction would be prohibited by certain Executive orders prohibiting trade and other dealings with, and investment in, Iran and blocking the GOI and Iranian financial institutions, or any regulation issued pursuant to the foregoing (including the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR)), if the transaction were engaged in by a United States person or in the United States. Civil penalties for the U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity s violation of Section 8, attempted violation, conspiracy to violate, or causing of a violation shall apply to the U.S. person that owns or controls such entity to the same extent that they would apply to a U.S. person for the same conduct.

Section 20(c) of E.O. 13846 contains a savings clause that continues in effect under E.O. 13846 regulations, orders, directives, and licenses that were issued pursuant to E.O. 13628 and remained in effect immediately prior to the date of E.O. 13846 Pursuant to this authority, section 560.215 of the ITSR, which implemented section 4 of 13628, and licenses issued pursuant to E.O. 13628 that were valid as of the date of E.O. 13846 remain in effect, subject to their existing terms and conditions. Such terms and conditions include the expiration date of the license. [08-06-2018]



622. Are U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities covered under OFAC general licenses and/or permitted to apply for specific licenses from OFAC?

To the extent a transaction is exempt from the prohibitions of the ITSR, E.O. 13599, or section 1 or 15 of E.O. 13846, or is authorized by a general license issued pursuant to these authorities if engaged in by a U.S. person, it would not be prohibited for a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity (as defined above) to engage in the transaction, provided that it satisfies all the conditions and requirements of the exemption or general license. Similarly, if the transaction is one for which a U.S. person might apply for a specific license  for example, under OFAC s statement of licensing policy for certain targeted educational, cultural, and sports exchange programs that are designed to directly benefit the Iranian people set forth at section 560.545 of the ITSR  a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity or the U.S. person that owns or controls the entity may apply for a specific license for the U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity to engage in the transaction. Note: whether a U.S. parent company s specific license covers transactions by its owned or controlled foreign entity that are otherwise prohibited by section 8 of E.O. 13846 will depend on the terms of that license and the scope of the authorized activities.

Pursuant to subsection 20(c) of E.O. 13846, section 560.556 of the ITSR, which extends general licenses available under the ITSR to U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, remains in effect. [08-06-2018]



623. Is there a wind-down or safe harbor provision for Section 8 of E.O. 13846? 

No. Section 8 of E.O. 13846 continues in effect the prohibition previously contained in section 4 of E.O. 13628, which  consistent with subsection 218(d) of the TRA  provided that civil penalties would not apply if a U.S. person that owns or controls the foreign entity divested or terminated its business with the U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity not later than February 6, 2013. Because the relevant prohibition came into effect more than five years ago and a wind-down period was provided at that time, Section 8 of E.O. 13846 does not include such a wind-down authorization.

Please note, however, that section 560.537 of the ITSR authorizes  through 11:59 p.m. EST on November 4, 2018  all transactions and activities ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of activities that had been authorized under the now-revoked Iran General License H. To the extent a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity or a U.S. person is engaging in wind-down activities pursuant to section 560.537 of the ITSR, those activities should be completed prior to the general license s expiration at 11:59 p.m. EST on November 4, 2018. [08-06-2018]



Sanctions Relating to the Provision of Material Assistance to Certain Persons

624. What are the implications of subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846?

Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13846 provides authority to block the property and interests in property of persons determined, on or after November 5, 2018, to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of: (A) Iranian persons included on the SDN List or (B) any other persons included on the SDN List whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13599 or subsection 1(a) of E.O. 13846 (in both cases excluding Iranian depository institutions whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599). Certain activities relating to the pipeline project to supply natural gas from the Shah Deniz gas field in Azerbaijan to Europe and Turkey are excepted from this provision.

In implementing this provision, the United States Government will take appropriate steps to avoid, among other things, undue impacts on the access of the people of Iran to humanitarian items, telecommunications, and other basic services. [08-06-18]



Frequently Asked Questions Related to the &quot;Snap-back&quot; of Iranian sanctions in November, 2018




630. Is the provision or delivery of goods or services to an Iranian counterparty after November 4, 2018 allowed? &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 

The wind-down period has ended and the United States intends to fully enforce the sanctions that have come back into effect.&nbsp; The provision or delivery of goods or services and/or the extension of additional loans or credits to an Iranian counterparty after November 4, 2018  even pursuant to written contracts or written agreements entered into prior to May 8, 2018  may result in the imposition of U.S. sanctions unless such activities are exempt from regulation, authorized by OFAC, or otherwise not sanctionable.

The United States maintains authorizations and exceptions under U.S. sanctions that allow for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran by U.S. persons and non-U.S. persons.&nbsp; However, these authorizations and exceptions do not apply to transactions involving persons on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) that have been designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including designated Iranian financial institutions or the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), or activity that is subject to other sanctions (see FAQ 637).&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




631. I was not able to receive payment for goods or services fully provided or delivered prior to the end of the wind-down period. &nbsp;How should I proceed? 

In the event that a non-U.S., non-Iranian person is owed payment after the conclusion of the wind-down period on August 6, 2018, or November 4, 2018, as applicable, for goods or services fully provided or delivered to an Iranian counterparty prior to August 6, 2018, or November 4, 2018, as applicable, pursuant to a written contract or written agreement entered into prior to May 8, 2018, and such activities were consistent with U.S. sanctions in effect at the time of delivery or provision, the U.S. government would allow the non-U.S., non-Iranian person to receive payment for those goods or services according to the terms of the written contract or written agreement. &nbsp;Similarly, if a non-U.S., non-Iranian person is owed repayment after August 6, 2018, or November 4, 2018, as applicable, for loans or credits extended to an Iranian counterparty prior to the end of the 90-day or 180- day wind-down period, as applicable, provided that such loans or credits were extended pursuant to a written contract or written agreement entered into prior to May 8, 2018, and such activities were consistent with U.S. sanctions in effect at the time the loans or credits were extended, the U.S. government would allow the non-U.S., non-Iranian person to receive repayment of the related debt or obligation according to the terms of the written contract or written agreement. &nbsp;This allowance is designed for non-U.S., non-Iranian parties to be made whole for debts and obligations owed or due to them for goods or services fully provided or delivered or loans or credit extended to an Iranian party prior to the end of the 90-day or 180-day wind-down period, as applicable. &nbsp;Any payments would need to be consistent with U.S. sanctions, including that payments could not involve U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system, unless the transactions are exempt from regulation or authorized by OFAC (see FAQ 634 and FAQ 636). 

The U.S. government would evaluate matters falling outside the above parameters on a case-by-case basis.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




632. Will the U.S. government provide assurances beyond the guidance described in 631 and 634 that receipt of payment by non-U.S., non-Iranian persons is not sanctionable?

OFAC encourages non-U.S., non-Iranian persons to rely on the guidance provided in FAQs 631 and 634.&nbsp; Non-U.S., non-Iranian persons can seek guidance from OFAC or the State Department, as appropriate, prior to the receipt of payment, if they would like to confirm that the payments would meet the criteria set forth in FAQ 631 and FAQ&nbsp;634 and would not be subject to U.S. sanctions.&nbsp; [11-05-2018] 




633. Under what circumstances are goods or services considered  fully provided or delivered prior to the expiration of the relevant wind-down period, as referenced in FAQ 631 above? 

OFAC looks to the industry standard to determine whether particular goods or services are considered fully provided or delivered prior to the expiration of the relevant wind-down period. As a general matter, goods or services will be considered fully provided or delivered when the party providing or delivering the goods or services has performed all the actions and satisfied all the obligations necessary to be eligible for payment or other agreed-to compensation.&nbsp;With respect to goods exported to or from Iran, at a minimum, title to the goods must have transferred to the relevant party.&nbsp; [08-06-2018] 




634. Can I, as a non-U.S., non-Iranian person, receive payments after the relevant wind-down period ends for goods or services that were fully provided or delivered during the relevant wind-down period pursuant to contracts entered into prior to May 8, 2018? 

Yes, subject to the conditions set out below and in FAQ 631 above, non-U.S., non-Iranian persons may receive payment after the end of the relevant wind-down period for goods or services fully provided or delivered to an Iranian counterparty prior to expiration of the relevant wind-down period (see FAQ 633 above). In particular, the goods or services must have been fully provided or delivered prior to the end of the applicable wind-down period pursuant to a written contract or written agreement entered into prior to May 8, 2018; the relevant activities must have been consistent with U.S. sanctions in effect at the time of delivery or provision, including that the activities did not involve persons on the SDN List at the time of the transaction; and any payments must be consistent with U.S. sanctions, including that payments can not involve U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system, unless the transactions are exempt from regulation or authorized by OFAC (see FAQ 631 and FAQ 636).&nbsp; [11-05-2018] 






635. Can I, as a U.S. person or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity, receive payments after the relevant wind-down period ends for goods or services that were fully provided or delivered during the relevant wind-down period under an OFAC wind-down authorization and pursuant to a contract entered into prior to May 8, 2018? 

The wind-down authorizations allow U.S. persons and U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities to receive payments for activities conducted pursuant to such wind-down authorizations only during their validity periods. &nbsp;For example, a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity may receive payment through 11:59 p.m. eastern standard time on November 4, 2018 for Iran-related activities undertaken pursuant to section 560.537 of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) (winding down of transactions relating to U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities). 

Any payment following the end of the relevant wind-down period for activities undertaken pursuant to a wind-down authorization, including from an Iranian counterparty, would require specific authorization from OFAC. &nbsp;OFAC will evaluate such requests for specific licenses on a case-by-case basis. 

Any request for a specific license should provide sufficient details for OFAC to evaluate the application, including: whether the relevant transactions complied with U.S. sanctions as in effect at the time of the transactions; whether the activities were performed under a written contract or written agreement entered into prior to May 8, 2018; and why the applicant was unable to receive the payment for which authorization is sought prior to the end of the relevant wind-down period. OFAC will generally deny requests to receive payment for activities that were not authorized under the relevant wind-down authorizations or that were not undertaken pursuant to a written contract or written agreement entered into prior to May 8, 2018. 

As required by 31 C.F.R. section 501.801(b), applicants should identify the names of all parties who are concerned with or interested in the proposed transaction.&nbsp; To facilitate OFAC s review, the request should also include a description of the efforts that were undertaken to collect the payment during the relevant wind-down period and be accompanied by supporting documentation, including relevant contracts, invoices, and shipping documents. OFAC encourages applicants to submit applications online (link available here).&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




636. Can I receive payment for activities undertaken during the wind-down period if the payment involves a person that has been added to the SDN List, including a person that was previously on the List of Persons Blocked Solely Pursuant to E.O. 13599 (the  E.O. 13599 List ) but is now designated under another authority?

The United States intends to fully enforce the sanctions that apply to persons that were previously on the E.O. 13599 List but that are now designated under another authority. 

U.S. persons and U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities generally would require an OFAC authorization to receive any payment involving an SDN, regardless of whether they were previously on the E.O.13599 List.&nbsp; OFAC will evaluate requests for such authorization on a case-by-case basis, including whether payments are for goods or services fully provided or delivered during the wind-down period pursuant to an OFAC wind-down authorization (see FAQ 635). 

Non-U.S. persons, including foreign financial institutions, could be subject to sanctions for knowingly engaging in certain significant transactions involving an Iranian person on the SDN List  other than a non-designated Iranian financial institution  or a person designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including a person that was previously on the E.O. 13599 List but is now designated under another authority. Such persons will have a notation of  Additional Sanctions Information  Subject to Secondary Sanctions in their SDN List entry in addition to the tag for the other sanctions program(s) (e.g., the  [SDGT] tag, the  [IRAN-HR] tag, or the  [NPWMD] tag for persons designated under E.O. 13224, E.O. 13553, or E.O. 13382).&nbsp; 

Non-U.S., non-Iranian persons seeking to receive payment for activities undertaken during the wind-down period that involves a person added to the SDN List should seek guidance from OFAC or the State Department, as appropriate (see FAQ 634).&nbsp; [11-05-2018]






637. Is it sanctionable for non-U.S., non-Iranian persons to engage in transactions related to the provision of humanitarian and consumer goods to Iran? 

The United States maintains broad authorizations and exceptions under U.S. sanctions that allow for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran from the United States or by U.S. persons or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities.&nbsp; U.S. sanctions laws provide similar allowances for sales of food, agricultural commodities, medicine, and medical devices to Iran by non-U.S. persons. &nbsp;Broadly speaking, transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran are not sanctionable unless they involve persons on the SDN List that have been designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including designated Iranian financial institutions or the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), or activity that is subject to other sanctions.&nbsp; Additional guidance relating to these authorizations and exceptions can be found on the OFAC website here and here. 

Transactions by non-U.S. persons related to the export to Iran of consumer goods that do not fall within these exceptions, but are not expressly targeted by U.S. sanctions, should not involve certain persons on the SDN List, including the Central Bank of Iran or a designated Iranian financial institution, unless an exception under Section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 2012 (NDAA 2012) applies, or the IRGC.&nbsp; In addition, such transactions should not involve U.S. persons or transit the U.S. financial system, unless the activities and/or transactions are exempt from regulation or authorized by OFAC.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




638. What happened to the E.O. 13599 List?

The E.O. 13599 List was created to clarify that, regardless of their removal from the SDN List on January 16, 2016, persons that OFAC had previously identified as meeting the definition of the terms  Government of Iran or  Iranian financial institution still met those definitions and continued to be persons whose property and interests in property were blocked pursuant to E.O.&nbsp;13599 and section 560.211 of the ITSR.&nbsp; On November 5, 2018, OFAC moved persons identified on the E.O. 13599 List to the SDN List and removed the E.O. 13599 List from its website.&nbsp; 

Beginning on November 5, 2018, significant transactions with persons moved from the E.O. 13599 List to the SDN List, other than non-designated Iranian financial institutions, could be subject to secondary sanctions, unless an exception applies, such as the exception relating to transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran; or the significant reduction exception under Section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA 2012.&nbsp; Persons subject to secondary sanctions will have a notation of  Additional Sanctions Information  Subject to Secondary Sanctions in the SDN List entry.&nbsp; In addition, effective November 5, 2018, OFAC has amended the ITSR to replace references to the E.O. 13599 List with references to the SDN List. 

Some persons moved to the SDN List from the E.O. 13599 List also have been designated under additional authorities and, therefore, have received new unique identification numbers (UIDs) when added to the SDN List.&nbsp; Users of OFAC s sanctions list data may wish to reference the following mapping table to see how these specific records were added back onto the SDN list.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




639. Why are some persons that had been blocked solely pursuant to E.O.&nbsp;13599 now designated pursuant to other authorities, such as E.O. 13224 and E.O.&nbsp;13382?

OFAC designated multiple Iranian financial institutions and other persons previously blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 under E.O. 13224 (relating to counterterrorism), E.O.&nbsp;13382 (relating to WMD proliferation), and E.O. 13553 (relating to serious human rights abuses by the Government of Iran) on October 16, 2018, and November 5, 2018. &nbsp;These included persons that had been removed from the SDN List on January 16, 2016.&nbsp; As new information became available, OFAC determined that these persons met one or more of the criteria for designation under OFAC s other designation authorities.&nbsp; Relatedly, a number of persons that were previously designated pursuant to E.O. 13382 and were removed from the SDN List on January 16, 2016 were relisted on the SDN List on November 5, 2018 as persons identified as meeting the definitions of the  Government of Iran or an  Iranian financial institution pursuant to E.O. 13599.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




640. What does the November 5, 2018 amendment to the ITSR do?&nbsp; 

This regulatory amendment does two things.&nbsp; First, it amends the ITSR to reflect the re-imposition of ITSR-related sanctions lifted under the JCPOA, including sanctions pursuant to certain sections of E.O. 13846 and the relisting on the SDN List of persons included on the E.O. 13599 List.&nbsp; More specifically, this rule reinstates the regulatory provisions implementing the blocking authorities that were previously in sections 5 and 6 of E.O. 13622 and now are in sections 1 and 10 of E.O. 13846.&nbsp; Section 560.211(c) of the ITSR will now implement blocking of the property and interests in property of any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to have (i) on or after August 7, 2018, materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the purchase or acquisition of U.S. bank notes or precious metals by the Government of Iran, or (ii) on or after November 5, 2018, materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), the Naftiran Intertrade Company (NICO), or the Central Bank of Iran.&nbsp; Additionally, this rule removes references to the E.O. 13599 List to reflect OFAC s separate action removing the E.O. 13599 List from its website and relisting on the SDN List the persons that were previously listed on the E.O.&nbsp;13599 List.

Second, the rule amends an existing general license in the ITSR to allow individual U.S. persons to engage in transactions necessary to sell certain personal property in Iran (which was acquired before becoming a U.S. person or which was inherited from persons in Iran) and to transfer the proceeds of those sales to the United States.&nbsp; Section 560.543 of the ITSR currently authorizes individual U.S. persons to engage in transactions necessary for the sale of real property in Iran and the transfer of related proceeds to the United States, subject to a number of conditions and limitations. &nbsp;Authorized transactions include engaging the services of any persons in Iran necessary for the sale, such as an attorney, funds agent, or real estate broker, provided such person is not a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any part of 31 CFR chapter V, other than persons whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to Executive Order 13599 as the Government of Iran.&nbsp; OFAC is amending section 560.543 of the ITSR to authorize the sale of personal property in Iran and the transfer of related proceeds to the United States, subject to the same conditions and limitations applicable to sales of real property.&nbsp; 

Section 560.543 of the ITSR, as amended, does not authorize transactions that would be prohibited by a different sanctions program administered by OFAC, such as transactions with SDNs designated under E.O. 13224 or E.O. 13382 (OFAC s counterterrorism or counterproliferation authorities). &nbsp;[11-05-2018]




641. If a country with primary jurisdiction over a foreign financial institution did not receive a significant reduction exception (SRE) under section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA 2012, can funds currently held at the foreign financial institution in that country on behalf of the Central Bank of Iran be used to facilitate humanitarian trade with Iran?&nbsp; 

Yes. &nbsp;Transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran involving the Central Bank of Iran are excepted from the relevant sanctions under section 1245(d)(2) of the NDAA 2012 and sections 561.203 and 561.204 of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations (31 C.F.R. Part 561) (IFSR), regardless of whether the country has received an SRE. &nbsp;In addition, funds held on behalf of a non-designated Iranian financial institution at a foreign financial institution generally would not be subject to U.S. secondary sanctions and could be used to facilitate humanitarian trade.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 




642. Is the provision of certain associated services relating to the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran by persons in a country that has been granted a SRE sanctionable?

Many U.S. sanctions related to Iran include an exception for countries that have received a SRE under section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA 2012 (see policy-issues/financial-sanctions/frequently-asked-questions/ofac-consolidated-frequently-asked-questions#tra_504 for additional information regarding the implementation of the SRE and sanctionable transactions).&nbsp; To the extent the purchase of petroleum or petroleum products from Iran and the processing of the related financial transactions meet the requirements set out in section 1245(d)(4)(D) of the NDAA 2012, the services used to import the petroleum from Iran including services provided by the shipping sector of Iran and Iranian port operators would not be sanctionable pursuant to the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA), provided that Iranian entities that are involved in such transactions are not designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism, or its proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. (see policy-issues/financial-sanctions/frequently-asked-questions/ofac-consolidated-frequently-asked-questions#ifca for additional information).&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




643. Is payment of Iran-related insurance or reinsurance claims made on or after November 5, 2018 sanctionable if the claim arises from an incident that occurred prior to November 5, 2018? 

Payment of Iran-related insurance or reinsurance claims arising from incidents that occurred prior to November 5, 2018 could create sanctions exposure for non-U.S. persons to the extent such payment involves a person designated in connection with Iran s proliferation of WMD or support for international terrorism, or an Iranian person on the SDN List, other than a non-designated Iranian financial institution, or if the underlying activity involved such persons or was otherwise sanctionable at the time it occurred. 

&nbsp;

U.S. persons continue to be generally prohibited under the ITSR from exporting goods, services, or technology directly or indirectly to Iran, including participating in the payment of claims to or for the benefit of Iran or any persons blocked under the ITSR, or for the transportation of Iranian-origin oil, unless exempt or specifically authorized by OFAC.&nbsp; In addition, after November 4, 2018, to the extent a claim payment involves a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity, the payment of such claim would be prohibited and would require an authorization from OFAC prior to payment.&nbsp; 

&nbsp;

See FAQ 102 and FAQ 103&nbsp;for additional information relating to U.S. person involvement in global insurance policies and FAQ 303 and FAQ&nbsp;304 for additional information on secondary sanctions, and exceptions to these sanctions, such as the humanitarian exception, relating to insurance, reinsurance, or underwriting activities relating to Iran.&nbsp; [11-05-2018] &nbsp;




644. Is an entity that is owned or controlled by a U.S. person and established or maintained outside the United States (a  U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity ) required to apply restrictions akin to blocking on the property or interests in property of persons subject to section 560.211 of the ITSR?

Yes.&nbsp; Under section 560.215 of the ITSR, U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities are prohibited from knowingly engaging in any transaction, directly or indirectly, with the Government of Iran or any person subject to the jurisdiction of the Government of Iran that would be prohibited by the ITSR if engaged in by a U.S. person or in the United States.&nbsp; Section 560.211 of the ITSR separately prohibits transferring, paying, exporting, withdrawing, and dealing in any property and interests in property of the Government of Iran, any Iranian financial institution, and any other persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the ITSR, unless exempt or authorized by OFAC.&nbsp; 

In light of these prohibitions, U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities are required to apply restrictions akin to blocking on any property or interests in property of persons subject to section&nbsp;560.211 of the ITSR to ensure that such property and interests in property are not transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.&nbsp; This requirement applies both with respect to a person whose property and interests in property are blocked solely pursuant to the ITSR and a person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the ITSR and another authority (e.g., when a person is included on the List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons with the  [IRAN] tag, as well as a tag for another sanctions program, such as the terrorism tag ( [SDGT] ), nuclear proliferation tag ( [NPWMD] ), or human rights tag ( [IRAN-TRA] or  [IRAN-HR] )).&nbsp; 

Section 560.215(b)(1) of the ITSR deems an entity to be  owned or controlled by a U.S. person if the U.S. person holds a 50 percent or greater equity interest by vote or value in the entity; holds a majority of seats on the board of directors of the entity; or otherwise controls the actions, policies, or personnel decisions of the entity.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]




645. How will the re-imposition of sanctions on November 5, 2018 impact the provision of specialized financial messaging services to Iranian financial institutions? 

Following the re-imposition of U.S. sanctions on November 5, 2018, sanctions that had previously been lifted or waived as part of U.S. commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) will come back into effect in their entirety, including sanctions on the provision of specialized financial messaging services to certain Iranian financial institutions.&nbsp; 

As of November 5, 2018, sanctions on the provision of specialized financial messaging services set forth in section 220 of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (TRA) snap back in full.&nbsp; This authority provides for sanctions on specialized financial messaging services to the Central Bank of Iran or Iranian financial institutions designated in connection with Iran s support for terrorism or its proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and WMD delivery systems, as set out in subsection 104(c)(2)(E)(ii) of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010 (CISADA) (see section 220 of the TRA).&nbsp; Such Iranian financial institutions are listed on the SDN List and carry the  [IFSR] tag. 

Furthermore, knowingly providing significant financial, material, technological, or other support to Iranian persons on the SDN List, other than Iranian financial institutions blocked solely pursuant to E.O.&nbsp;13599 and listed on the SDN List with only the  [IRAN] tag, is sanctionable for persons in countries that have not received a significant reduction exception (see subsection 1244(c)(1) of IFCA).&nbsp; 

To avoid potential sanctions exposure, providers of specialized financial messaging services should discontinue the provision of such services to the Central Bank of Iran and any Iranian financial institutions designated in connection with Iran s WMD proliferation, support for terrorism, or human rights abuses.&nbsp; The Central Bank of Iran and such designated Iranian financial institutions will have  Subject to Secondary Sanctions listed in the  Identifications feature in their entry on the SDN List.&nbsp;&nbsp; 

Given that the U.S. government will continue to apply maximum financial pressure on the Iranian regime, including potential additional designations of Iranian financial institutions, the SDN List should be consulted regularly to determine which Iranian financial institutions have been designated.&nbsp; [11-05-2018]&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;



Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Executive Order (E.O.)&nbsp; Imposing Sanctions with Respect to the Iron, Steel, Aluminum, and Copper Sectors of Iran of May 8, 2019


666. What does E.O. 13871 do?

E.O. 13871 authorizes sanctions with respect to the iron, steel, aluminum, and copper sectors of Iran.

Section 1 of E.O. 13871 authorizes blocking sanctions on any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State:
(i) to be operating in the iron, steel, aluminum, or copper sector of Iran, or to be a person that owns, controls, or operates an entity that is part of the iron, steel, aluminum, or copper sector of Iran;
(ii) to have knowingly engaged, on or after the effective date of the order, in a significant transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with the iron, steel, aluminum, or copper sectors of Iran;
(iii) to have knowingly engaged, on or after the effective date of the order, in a significant transaction for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of iron, iron products, aluminum, aluminum products, steel, steel products, copper, or copper products from Iran;
(iv) to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1; or
(v) to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to section 1.
Section 2 of E.O. 13871 authorizes correspondent and payable-through account sanctions on foreign financial institutions (FFIs) determined to have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction:
(i) for the sale, supply, or transfer to Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with the iron, steel, aluminum, or copper sectors of Iran;
(ii) for the purchase, acquisition, sale, transport, or marketing of iron, iron products, aluminum, aluminum products, steel, steel products, copper, or copper products from Iran; or
(iii) for or on behalf of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the order.
Sections 3-13 of E.O. 13871 contain exceptions, definitions, and other implementing provisions related to the sanctions. [08-06-2019]



667. When does E.O. 13871&nbsp;become effective?

E.O. 13871 became effective upon signing. [08-06-2019]&nbsp;



668. Is there a wind-down period?

Persons engaged in transactions that could be sanctioned under E.O. 13871 had a 90-day period after the issuance of E.O. 13871 to wind down those transactions without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13871. Those persons were advised to take the necessary steps to wind down transactions by the end of the 90-day wind-down period to avoid exposure to sanctions, and that entering into new business that would be sanctionable under the&nbsp;E.O. on or after May 8, 2019 will not be considered wind-down activity and could be sanctioned even during the wind-down period. &nbsp;The wind-down period expires on August 6, 2019. [08-06-2019]&nbsp;


669. Does E.O. 13871&nbsp;expand upon existing sanctions relating to trade with Iran in certain raw and semi-finished metals, such as aluminum and steel?

&nbsp;

Yes. E.O. 13871&nbsp;expands upon existing sanctions under section 1245 of IFCA on the sale, supply, or transfer, directly or indirectly, to or from Iran of certain materials, including raw and semi-finished metals such as aluminum and steel, as described in subsections 1245(a)(l)(B) or (C) of IFCA.

&nbsp;

In addition, E.O. 13871 explicitly targets the iron and copper sectors of Iran. [08-06-2019]&nbsp;


670. Are there exceptions to the sanctions imposed under E.O.13871?

Yes. The sanctions authorized under E.O. 13871 do not apply to transactions for the conduct of the official business of the United States Government or the United Nations (including its specialized agencies, programmes, funds, and related organizations) by employees, grantees, or contractors thereof. [08-06-2019]&nbsp;



682. What does the August 06, 2019 regulatory amendment related to E.O. 13871 do?

The regulatory amendment: (i) implements the correspondent or payable-through account sanctions set forth in section 2 of E.O. 13871 by incorporating those provisions in the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 561 (IFSR); (ii) renames the Iranian Human Rights Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 562, as the Iranian Sector and Human Rights Abuses Sanctions Regulations (ISHR); and (iii) implements the blocking sanctions set forth in section 1 of E.O. 13871 by incorporating those provisions in the ISHR. [08-06-2019]


671. How are the terms  significant transaction or transactions; significant financial services; significant financial transaction interpreted for purposes of correspondent or payable-through account sanctions set forth in section 2 of E.O. 13871?

&nbsp;

The interpretation of  significant transaction or transactions; significant financial services; significant financial transaction, as described in the correspondent account sanctions in the IFSR, provides that the Department of the Treasury may consider the totality of the facts and circumstances and sets forth a list of broad factors that can play a role in the determination whether transactions, financial services, and financial transactions are significant, including: &nbsp;(a)&nbsp;the size, number, and frequency of the transactions, financial services, or financial transactions; (b) the nature of the transactions, financial services, or financial transactions, including their type, complexity, and commercial purpose; (c) the level of awareness of management and whether the transactions are part of a pattern of conduct; (d) the nexus of the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions and blocked persons; (e) the impact of the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions on statutory objectives; (f)&nbsp;whether the transactions, financial services, and financial transactions involve deceptive practices; (g) whether the transactions solely involve the passive holdings of Central Bank of Iran (CBI) reserves or repayment by the CBI of official development assistance or the transfer of funds required as a condition of Iran s membership in an international financial institution; and (h) other relevant factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant. (31 C.F.R. §&nbsp;561.404). [08-06-2019]


683. How is the term  significant transaction or transactions interpreted for purposes of blocking sanctions set forth in section 1 of E.O. 13871?

The interpretation of  significant transaction or transactions, as described in the ISHR provides that the Department of the Treasury may consider the totality of the facts and circumstances and sets forth a list of broad factors that can play a role in the determination whether transactions are significant, including: (a) the size, number, and frequency of the transactions; (b) the nature of the transactions, or the goods or services for sale, supply, or transfer, including their type, complexity, and commercial purpose; (c) the level of awareness of management and whether the transactions are part of a pattern of conduct; (d) the nexus of the person that engaged in the transactions and the prohibited activities in sections 1(a)(ii) and 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13871; (e) the impact of the transactions on the objectives of E.O. 13871; (f) whether the transactions attempt to obscure or conceal the actual parties or true nature of the transactions, or evade sanctions; and (g) other relevant factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant. (31 C.F.R. § 562.407). [08-06-2019]



684. What is the definition of the  iron sector of Iran ? 

The term iron sector of Iran means the mining, refining, processing, or manufacturing of iron or iron products in Iran. (31 C.F.R. § 561.336; 31 C.F.R. § 561.317). [08-06-2019]



685. What is the definition of the  steel sector of Iran ?

The term steel sector of Iran means the iron-ore smelting, ferrous-scrap melting, refining, processing, or manufacturing of steel or steel products in Iran. (31 C.F.R. § 561.337; 31 C.F.R. § 562.318). [08-06-2019]



686. What are the definitions of  iron, iron products, steel, and steel products ?

The terms iron, iron products, steel, and steel products mean any raw, semi-fabricated, fabricated, or finished form of iron, iron alloy, alloy steel, non-alloy steel, ferroalloys, pig iron, and spiegeleisen of all grades, sizes, and thicknesses, whether or not clad, plated, or coated, including in the following forms:&nbsp; iron ores and concentrates, including roasted iron pyrites; pigs and blocks; ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron ore and other spongy ferrous products, in lumps or pellets; granules and powders; ingots, blooms billets, slabs, and beam blanks; flat-rolled products (plates, sheets, strips, and foils) either cut-to-length or in coils; bars and rods; structural profiles (beams, channels, angles, and other shapes); sheet piling; railway or tramway track construction materials; tubes, pipes, and hollow profiles; tube or pipe fittings; reservoirs, tanks, vats, and similar containers; wire, stranded wire, ropes, cables, and plaited band; castings, stampings, and forgings; and ferrous waste and scrap, including slag.&nbsp; (31&nbsp;C.F.R. § 561.335; 31 C.F.R. § 562.316). [08-06-2019]



687. What is the definition of the  aluminum sector of Iran ?

The term aluminum sector of Iran means the mining, refining, processing, or manufacturing of aluminum or aluminum products in Iran. &nbsp;(31 C.F.R. § 561.332; 31 C.F.R. § 562.313). [08-06-2019]



688. What are the definitions of  aluminum and  aluminum products ?

The terms aluminum and aluminum products mean any raw, semi-fabricated, fabricated, or finished form of aluminum or aluminum alloy of all grades, sizes, and thicknesses, including in the following forms:&nbsp; ores and concentrates (e.g., bauxite and alumina); unwrought aluminum including ingots, slabs, and billets; powders and flakes; wrought aluminum including bars, rods, profiles, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, and pipes; tube or pipe fittings; reservoirs, tanks, vats, and similar containers; wire, stranded wire, ropes, cables, and plaited band; castings, stampings, and forgings; waste and scrap, including slag, and any aluminum and aluminum products produced from the melting or recycling of aluminum scrap.&nbsp; (31 C.F.R. § 561.331; 31&nbsp;C.F.R. § 562.312). [08-06-2019]



689. What is the definition of the  copper sector of Iran ?

The term copper sector of Iran means the mining, refining, processing, or manufacturing of copper or copper products in Iran. &nbsp;(31 C.F.R. § 561.334; 31 C.F.R. § 562.314). [08-06-2019]



690. What are the definitions of  copper and  copper products ?

The terms copper and copper products mean any raw, semi-fabricated, fabricated, or finished form of copper or copper alloy of all grades, sizes, and thicknesses, including in the following forms:&nbsp; ores and concentrates; copper mattes; cement copper (precipitated copper); refined, unrefined, wrought, or unwrought copper; billets; cathodes; bars, rods, profiles, plates, sheets, strips, foil, tubes, and pipes; tube and pipe fittings; powders and flakes; reservoirs, tanks, vats, and similar containers; wire, stranded wire, ropes, cables, and plaited band; castings, stampings, and forgings; and waste and scrap, including slag.&nbsp; (31 C.F.R. § 561.333; 31&nbsp;C.F.R.&nbsp;§ 562.314). [08-06-2019]



804. Do sanctions on COSCO Shipping Tanker (Dalian) Seaman &amp; Ship Management Co. apply to its corporate parent and affiliates?

COSCO Shipping Tanker (Dalian) Seaman &amp; Ship Management Co. was determined by the Secretary of State on September 25, 2019, to meet the criteria for the imposition of sanctions under Executive Order (E.O.) 13846, and the Secretary of State imposed certain sanctions, including blocking, on this entity.&nbsp; The blocking sanctions apply only to this listed entity and any entities in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp; Sanctions do not apply to this entity s ultimate parent, COSCO Shipping Corporation Ltd. (COSCO).&nbsp; Similarly, sanctions do not apply to COSCO s other subsidiaries or affiliates (e.g., COSCO Shipping Holdings), provided that such entities are not owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons.&nbsp; U.S. persons, therefore, are not prohibited from dealing with COSCO, its non-blocked subsidiaries, or non-blocked affiliates to the extent the proposed dealings do not involve any blocked person, or any other activities prohibited pursuant to any OFAC sanctions authorities.

&nbsp;

With respect to transactions involving non U.S. persons outside of U.S. jurisdiction, please see FAQ 805. [01-31-2020]



805. Are non-U.S. persons exposed to sanctions for providing goods or services to, or engaging in other transactions with, a non-Iranian person sanctioned under section 3 of E.O. 13846?

No, non-U.S. persons are generally not exposed to sanctions for providing goods or services to, or engaging in other transactions with, a non-Iranian person sanctioned under section 3 of E.O. 13846.

However, please note that non-U.S. persons should ensure that the provision of goods or services to, or other transactions with such non-Iranian persons do not involve: (1) prohibited transactions by U.S. persons (including U.S. financial institutions) or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, unless the transaction is exempt from regulation, or authorized by OFAC; (2) the knowing provision of significant support to an Iranian person on OFAC s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List); or (3) the knowing facilitation of a significant transaction for a person on the SDN List that has been designated in connection with Iran s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including designated Iranian financial institutions or the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), or other activity for which sanctions have been imposed with respect to Iran (e.g., knowingly engaging in a significant transaction for the purchase of petroleum from Iran).

For information about persons sanctioned by State Department pursuant to Section 3 of E.O. 13846, please see the relevant State press statement or Federal Register Notice. [11-27-2019]


810. On December 11, 2019, the State Department announced that it would designate the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL) and E-Sail Shipping Limited ( E-Sail ) under Executive Order (E.O.) 13382, effective June 8, 2020. IRISL and E-Sail are already listed on the SDN List. What will be the impact of the State Department s designation of these entities under E.O. 13382?


&nbsp;

On November 5, 2018, OFAC identified IRISL and E-Sail on the SDN List with the [IRAN] tag to indicate that they are entities meeting the definition of the Government of Iran whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13599.

&nbsp;

Following their designation by the State Department under E.O. 13382 on June 8, 2020, OFAC will add the [NPWMD] and [IFSR] tags to the entries for IRISL and E-Sail on the SDN List. As a result, transactions by U.S. persons or within (or transiting) the United States involving IRISL and E-Sail will be subject to the prohibitions in the Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 544 (WMDPSR), in addition to the prohibitions in E.O. 13599 implemented through the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR). Non-U.S. persons that knowingly engage in certain transactions with IRISL or E-Sail risk exposure to sanctions under additional authorities. [12-11-2019]


811. Can I ship agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran via IRISL or E-Sail on or after June 8, 2020?

The United States maintains broad authorizations and exceptions under U.S. sanctions that allow for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran by U.S. and non-U.S. persons (see, e.g., FAQ 637). However, these authorizations and exceptions generally do not apply to transactions with persons designated pursuant to E.O. 13382.

Following the designations of IRISL and E-Sail under E.O. 13382 on June 8, 2020, transactions by U.S. persons involving IRISL or E-Sail will be subject to the prohibitions in the WMDPSR, in addition to the prohibitions in the ITSR. This means that, effective June 8, 2020, unless authorized under the WMDPSR or exempt, U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in transactions involving IRISL or E-Sail, including transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices by U.S. persons or from the United States that are authorized under the general licenses set forth in, or specifically licensed pursuant to, sections 560.530, 560.532, or 560.533 of the ITSR.

In addition, non-U.S. persons that knowingly engage in certain transactions with IRISL or E-Sail, even for the sale to Iran of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices, risk exposure to sanctions under additional authorities.

To avoid sanctions risks, U.S. and non-U.S. persons should ensure that transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices involving IRISL or E-Sail are concluded no later than June 8, 2020, when the designations of IRISL and E-Sail pursuant to E.O. 13382 come into effect. [12-11-2019]

816. Is there a wind-down period for Executive Order 13902,  Imposing Sanctions with Respect to Additional Sectors of Iran (E.O. 13902)?



Persons engaged in transactions that could be sanctioned under E.O. 13902 with respect to the construction, mining, manufacturing, and textiles sectors of the Iranian economy have a 90-day period after the issuance of E.O. 13902 to wind down those transactions without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13902. Such persons should take the necessary steps to wind down transactions by the end of the 90-day wind-down period to avoid exposure to sanctions, and be aware that entering into new business that would be sanctionable under the E.O. on or after January 10, 2020 will not be considered wind-down activity and could be sanctioned even during the wind-down period. The wind-down period with respect to the construction, mining, manufacturing, and textiles sectors expires on April 9, 2020. [01-16-2020]



821. What does General License No. 8A (GL 8A) authorize with respect to humanitarian-related transactions and activities involving the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) or the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC)?

As a result of the CBI and NIOC’s designations pursuant to Executive Order 13224, as amended (E.O. 13224), U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any transaction or dealing in the property or interests in property of the CBI or NIOC under the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 CFR part 594 (GTSR), unless exempt or authorized by OFAC. In addition, U.S. persons and U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities are subject to broad prohibitions on transactions or dealings involving the CBI or NIOC under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 CFR part 560 (ITSR), unless exempt or authorized by OFAC.

GL 8A authorizes certain humanitarian-related transactions and activities involving the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that would be prohibited by the GTSR or by the ITSR as a result of the CBI and NIOC’s designations under E.O. 13224 but that would have been authorized under the ITSR prior to the relevant designation under E.O. 13224. For example, if a U.S. person could have relied on general or specific licenses pursuant to sections 560.530(a) or (b), 560.532, or 560.533 of the ITSR to engage in certain activities prior to the CBI or NIOC’s designations under E.O. 13224, GL 8A provides the additional authorization needed to engage in such activities.

Please note that GL 8A does not authorize humanitarian-related transactions involving Iranian financial institutions designated under E.O. 13224 other than the CBI. Please further note that the authorizations at sections 560.530, 560.532, and 560.533 remain otherwise applicable according to their terms. [10-26-2020]



822. I’m a U.S. person that relied on general or specific licenses pursuant to 560.530, 560.532, or 560.533 of the ITSR to conduct humanitarian-related transactions and activities involving the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) or the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) prior to their designations under E.O. 13224, as amended. Is any further authorization needed to conduct such transactions following the designations of the CBI and NIOC under E.O. 13224?

No. As detailed in FAQ 821, GL 8A authorizes certain humanitarian-related transactions and activities involving the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that would be prohibited by the GTSR or by the ITSR due to the exclusion at section 560.530(d)(5) of the ITSR. Further authorization from OFAC, beyond GL 8A, is not required for such transactions and activities involving the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that would have been authorized pursuant to a general license in sections 560.530(a) or (b), 560.532, or 560.533 of the ITSR prior to CBI and NIOC’s designations under E.O. 13224, as amended. Additionally, transactions and activities authorized under specific licenses issued pursuant to sections 560.530, 560.532, or 560.533 of the ITSR involving the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, are also authorized pursuant to GL 8A.

Any transactions otherwise prohibited by the ITSR or GTSR must be separately licensed pursuant to the ITSR or GTSR, as appropriate. [10-26-2020]



823. Do non-U.S. persons risk exposure to U.S. secondary sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions or activities involving the Central Bank of Iran (CBI) or the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) that U.S. persons would be authorized to engage in under General License No. 8A (GL 8A)?

No. Non-U.S. persons generally do not risk exposure under U.S. secondary sanctions relating to Iran for engaging in the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran, as such transactions are generally subject to exceptions in otherwise applicable authorities, provided the transactions do not involve persons designated in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or weapons of mass destruction (WMD) proliferation. Non-U.S. persons do not risk exposure under U.S. secondary sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions or activities involving the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that would be authorized under GL 8A if engaged in by a U.S. person, provided such transactions and activities do not involve any person designated in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or WMD proliferation, other than the CBI, NIOC, or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest. [10-26-2020]



824. What is the Swiss Humanitarian Trade Arrangement (SHTA)? 

On October 25, 2019, the U.S. Departments of State and the Treasury announced a new humanitarian framework to assist foreign governments and foreign financial institutions in establishing payment mechanisms to facilitate humanitarian exports to Iran that are subject to enhanced due diligence. While the United States maintains broad exceptions and authorizations for the conduct of humanitarian trade with Iran, this humanitarian framework presents an additional, voluntary option for facilitating payment for exports of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran. The SHTA is the first operational channel to be established under this humanitarian framework, in partnership with the Swiss government. Initial pilot transactions were successfully conducted in late January 2020, and the SHTA was formally established on&nbsp;27 February 2020. Under the SHTA, participating financial institutions commit to conducting enhanced due diligence to ensure that humanitarian goods reach the people of Iran and are not misused by the Iranian regime.

For more information on the humanitarian mechanism as announced by the U.S. government, please refer to the guidance published on the Treasury s website on October 25, 2019. Additional guidance for companies and financial institutions interested in participating in the SHTA can be found in the Treasury SHTA fact sheet and OFAC FAQs 825 and 826. [02-27-2020]



825. How can parties participate in the Swiss Humanitarian Trade Arrangement (SHTA) to export humanitarian goods to Iran?

The SHTA is overseen by Switzerland’s State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) and intended for use by U.S. and non-U.S. persons domiciled in Switzerland. Exporters within Swiss jurisdiction may reach out to SECO at SHTA@seco.admin.ch for further details on requirements and instructions for participating in the SHTA. In addition to any due diligence imposed under the SHTA, U.S. persons and their owned or controlled foreign entities must continue to comply with the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR), when conducting exports of humanitarian goods to Iran. Certain exports and sales of humanitarian goods to Iran are authorized pursuant to sections 560.530, 560.532, and 560.533 of the ITSR. In addition, General License 8A provides additional authorizations that may be necessary for such humanitarian-related transactions due to the designations of the Central Bank of Iran and the National Iranian Oil Company under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended. For further information regarding General License 8A, please see associated FAQs 821, 822, and 823. General License L also extends the authorizations, exemptions, and activity that would otherwise be excluded from prohibition under the ITSR to apply to Iranian financial institutions blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902, including those authorizations and exemptions for exports of humanitarian goods to Iran. For further information regarding General License L, please see associated FAQs 842, 843, and 844. [10-26-2020]



826. What options exist for exporting humanitarian goods to Iran outside the Swiss Humanitarian Trade Arrangement (SHTA)? 

Transactions for the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices are not required to be processed through the SHTA. See FAQ 637 for guidance setting out existing exceptions to U.S. sanctions for the export of humanitarian goods to Iran.

Foreign governments and foreign financial institutions interested in establishing a humanitarian mechanism consistent with the guidance published on October 25, 2019, should reach out to the Department of the Treasury s Office of Foreign Assets Control for more information or to provide a proposed framework for evaluation. Such proposals should demonstrate careful consideration of the illustrative list of enhanced due diligence and reporting expectations described in the October 25, 2019 guidance. [02-27-2020]


&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Guidance Related to Humanitarian Assistance with Regard to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Iran.


828. I want to help with the humanitarian response to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Iran. What can I do to help while remaining compliant with U.S. sanctions?

There are a number of ways to provide humanitarian goods or assistance to the Iranian people in response to the COVID-19 outbreak in Iran, consistent with U.S. sanctions.

The making of humanitarian donations to recipients in Iran from the United States or by U.S. persons, including the donation of medicine intended to relieve human suffering, are generally exempt from U.S. sanctions on Iran under section 560.210(b) of the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 CFR Part 560 (ITSR), provided that such donations are not being made to the Government of Iran or other persons blocked pursuant to section 560.211 of the ITSR, or to any individual or entity listed on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List).

In addition, the United States maintains broad exceptions and authorizations that allow for the commercial sale and export of humanitarian goods, including medicine and medical devices, to Iran or the Government of Iran from the United States or by U.S. persons or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities, subject to certain conditions. U.S. sanctions laws provide similar allowances for sales of humanitarian goods, including medicine and medical devices, to Iran by non-U.S. persons. These exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations generally do not apply to transactions involving persons on OFAC’s SDN List that have been designated in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). For humanitarian transactions involving the Central Bank of Iran or the National Iranian Oil Company, which were each designated as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 as amended, please see General License 8A issued pursuant to the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations (GTSR) and the ITSR, as well as OFAC Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)&nbsp;821, 822, and 823.

Furthermore, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are authorized under General License E to export or re-export services to or related to Iran in support of certain not-for-profit activities designed to directly benefit the Iranian people, including the provision of donated health-related services and distribution of donated articles such as medicine intended to be used to relieve human suffering, in Iran.

Persons interested in providing humanitarian assistance to Iran related to the COVID-19 outbreak should review sections 560.210(b), 560.530, 560.532, and 560.533 and General License E of the ITSR, General License L issued pursuant to E.O. 13902, and General License 8A issued pursuant to the GTSR and the ITSR, the guidance provided in FAQs&nbsp; 549, 637, 821, 822, 823, 826​, 842, 843, and 844, and the guidance provided in the COVID-19 Fact Sheet,&nbsp;“Guidance on the Sale of Food, Agricultural Commodities, Medicine, and Medical Devices by Non-U.S. Persons to Iran” and “Clarifying Guidance on Humanitarian Assistance and Related Exports to the Iranian People.” Other types of humanitarian activities or exports by U.S. persons may be authorized pursuant to a specific license from OFAC.

Please note any transfers of funds in support of activities authorized by General License E must be made by the NGOs themselves, and not directly by U.S. individuals, in accordance with the conditions of General License E. [10-26-2020]


&nbsp;


Ending of Certain Iran-related Nuclear Waivers


829.&nbsp;&nbsp;Following the Secretary of State s announcement on May 27, 2020 that he will be ending certain Iran nuclear-related waivers, will there be a wind-down period for persons engaged in activity permitted by these waivers?&nbsp;

&nbsp;
Yes.&nbsp; Persons engaged in activities currently permitted by the Department of State s nuclear-related waivers associated with the Arak reactor modernization redesign, the transfer into Iran of enriched uranium for the Tehran Research Reactor, and the transfer out of Iran of certain nuclear fuel scrap and of spent research reactor fuel will have a final, 60-day wind-down period in which to cease these activities without risking exposure to covered sanctions.&nbsp; The 60-day wind-down period ends on July 27, 2020.&nbsp; Persons engaged in such activities should take the steps necessary to wind down those activities by July 27, 2020 to avoid potential exposure to sanctions under U.S. law. Persons engaged in such activities after that date may be exposed to certain sanctions under the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act (IFCA) absent a waiver or exception.&nbsp; IFCA provides for sanctions on persons determined to knowingly provide significant financial, material, technological, or other support to, or goods or services in support of any activity or transaction on behalf of or for the benefit of, an Iranian person on OFAC s SDN List, such as the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran (AEOI).&nbsp; IFCA also provides for sanctions on persons determined to knowingly sell, supply, or transfer, directly or indirectly, to or from Iran certain materials, including raw and semi-finished metals, if the materials are provided to or from an Iranian person on OFAC s SDN List, such as AEOI.&nbsp; For more information, please see the&nbsp;Department of State s website&nbsp;.&nbsp; [05-27-2020]



Executive Order (E.O.) 13902, &quot;Imposing Sanctions With Respect to Additional Sectors of Iran&quot;

830. Will OFAC target Iranian manufacturers of medicines, medical devices, or products used for sanitation or hygiene or as personal protective equipment for use in Iran pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13902 for continuing to manufacture these items? Will OFAC target persons conducting or facilitating transactions for the provision of such items to Iran if the transaction involves a person sanctioned under E.O. 13902?


No. For the purposes of evaluating sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13902, persons in Iran manufacturing medicines, medical devices, or products used for sanitation, hygiene, medical care, medical safety, and manufacturing safety, including soap, hand sanitizer, ventilators, respirators, personal hygiene products, diapers, infant and childcare items, personal protective equipment, and manufacturing safety systems, solely for use in Iran and not for export from Iran, will not be considered to be operating in the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy. Note that persons conducting or facilitating transactions for the provision, including any sale, of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran will not be subject to sanctions under E.O. 13902. (See FAQs 844&nbsp;and&nbsp;847&nbsp;for more information.)

E.O. 13902 imposes sanctions with respect to any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to operate in the construction, mining, manufacturing, and textiles sectors of the Iranian economy, and any additional sectors of the Iranian economy as may be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State. On October 8, 2020, the Secretary of the Treasury identified the financial sector of the Iranian economy for additional sanctions under E.O. 13902. Iranian and non-Iranian persons operating in these sectors could be subject to sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13902.

The United States maintains broad exceptions and authorizations that allow for the commercial sale and export of humanitarian goods, including medicine and medical devices, to Iran or the Government of Iran from the United States or by U.S. persons or U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entities. Similar exceptions apply to the export of such humanitarian goods to Iran or the Government of Iran by non-U.S. persons. However, these authorizations and exceptions do not apply to transactions involving persons on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) that have been designated in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (including certain designated Iranian financial institutions and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps), or in connection with activity that is subject to other sanctions not specific to Iran, unless exempt or otherwise permitted, such as certain transactions or activities involving the Central Bank of Iran, the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that are consistent with GL 8A. For further guidance related to humanitarian trade with Iran and the provision of humanitarian assistance to Iran, please see FAQ 828. [12-07-2020]


831. How will OFAC define the sectors of the Iranian economy specified in Executive Order (E.O.) 13902 of January 10, 2020?


E.O. 13902 imposes sanctions with respect to any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury to operate in the construction, mining, manufacturing, and textiles sectors of the Iranian economy, and any additional sectors of the Iranian economy as may be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State. On October 8, 2020, the Secretary of the Treasury identified the financial sector of the Iranian economy for additional sanctions under E.O. 13902. Iranian and non-Iranian persons operating in these sectors of the Iranian economy or sectors of the Iranian economy identified in the future could be subject to sanctions.

OFAC expects to promulgate regulations that define the terms construction sector of the Iranian economy, mining sector of the Iranian economy, manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy, textiles sector of the Iranian economy, and financial sector of the Iranian economy consistent with the following:

Construction sector of the Iranian economy: The term construction sector of the Iranian economy means the production, procurement, devising, framing, or arranging in Iran of parts or materials to fabricate, shape, or form buildings or structures, including the on-site development, assembly, or construction of residential, commercial, or institutional buildings in Iran. The term applies to engaging in new work, additions, alterations, maintenance, and repairs of residential, commercial, or institutional buildings. Persons such as for-sale builders, design-build firms, and project construction management firms in Iran may be considered as operating in this sector.

Mining sector of the Iranian economy: The term mining sector of the Iranian economy means any act, process, or industry of extracting, at the surface or underground, ores, coal, precious stones, or any other minerals or geological materials from the Earth in Iran.

Manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy: The term manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy means the creation in Iran of goods by manual labor or machinery that are for export from Iran or for sale within Iran. For the purposes of evaluating sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13902, persons in Iran manufacturing medicines, medical devices, or products used for sanitation, hygiene, medical care, medical safety, and manufacturing safety, including soap, hand sanitizer, ventilators, respirators, personal hygiene products, diapers, infant and childcare items, personal protective equipment, and manufacturing safety systems, solely for use in Iran and not for export from Iran, will not be considered to be operating in the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy. Note that persons conducting or facilitating transactions for the provision, including any sale, of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran will not be subject to sanctions under E.O. 13902.

Textiles sector of the Iranian economy: The term textiles sector of the Iranian economy means the fiber synthesis, dyeing, weaving, knitting, or felting in Iran of textiles, including apparel, carpets, cloths, fabric, or related goods, that are for export from Iran.

Financial sector of the Iranian economy: The term financial sector of the Iranian economy includes all Iranian financial institutions as defined in Section 561.320 of the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations, meaning any entity (including foreign branches), wherever located, organized under the laws of Iran or any jurisdiction within Iran, or owned or controlled by the Government of Iran, or in Iran, or owned or controlled by any of the foregoing, that is engaged in the business of accepting deposits, making, granting, transferring, holding, or brokering loans or credits, or purchasing or selling foreign exchange, securities, commodity futures or options, or procuring purchasers and sellers thereof, as principal or agent. Iranian financial institutions include but are not limited to depository institutions, banks, savings banks, money service businesses, trust companies, insurance companies, securities brokers and dealers, commodity futures and options brokers and dealers, forward contract and foreign exchange merchants, securities and commodities exchanges, clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, dealers in precious metals, stones, or jewels, and holding companies, affiliates, or subsidiaries of any of the foregoing.

Persons who knowingly engage in a significant transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with the above-named sectors of the Iranian economy risk exposure to blocking sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13902. In addition, persons that have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, persons designated pursuant to E.O. 13902 could themselves be designated. Furthermore, foreign financial institutions that have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction for such designated persons risk exposure to U.S. correspondent account or payable-through account sanctions. [12-07-2020]


832. What are significant goods or services used in connection with a sector of the Iranian economy specified in Executive Order (E.O.) 13902?


Persons who have knowingly engaged in a significant transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with the construction, mining, manufacturing, textiles, and financial sectors of the Iranian economy as described in FAQ 831 risk exposure to blocking sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13902. Further, foreign financial institutions that have knowingly conducted or facilitated any significant financial transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with those sectors of the Iranian economy risk exposure to U.S. correspondent account or payable-through account sanctions.

OFAC expects to promulgate regulations defining goods and services used in connection with the construction, mining, manufacturing, textiles, and financial sectors of the Iranian economy consistent with the following (See FAQ 833 for an interpretation of the term “significant.”):

Goods or services used in connection with the construction sector of the Iranian economy:

The term goods used in connection with the construction sector of the Iranian economy means equipment or materials that enable the services described below or the activities described in FAQ 831 with respect to the construction sector of the Iranian economy, including: building supplies, concrete, scaffolding, lifts, hoists, cranes, conveyors, and mechanized equipment for material handling. Goods that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the construction sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including personal protective equipment, safety devices, and alarm systems.

The term services used in connection with the construction sector of the Iranian economy include: blasting, demolition, dredging, electrical work, excavating, masonry, plumbing, rigging, welding, for-sale building, design-build consultations, and construction management. Services that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the construction sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including cleaning, safety inspections, and services necessary for use of protective goods described above.

Goods or services used in connection with the mining sector of the Iranian economy:

The term goods used in connection with the mining sector of the Iranian economy means equipment or materials that enable the services described below or the activities described in FAQ 831 with respect to the mining sector of the Iranian economy, including: boring equipment, conveyor belts, directional digging technology, haul trucks, hydraulic excavators, explosives, and power shovels. Goods that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in mines in Iran are excluded from this definition, including personal protective equipment, safety devices, ventilation systems, and alarm systems.

The term services used in connection with the mining sector of the Iranian economy includes: auguring, boring, backfilling, combusting, crushing, exploration, grinding, grading, irrigating, impounding, magnetic separation, mineral processing, geophysical surveying, mapping services, operating mines or quarries, site preparation, and related construction activities. Services that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the mining sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including rescue and accident response services, cleaning, safety inspections, and services necessary for use of protective goods described above.

Goods or services used in connection with the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy:

The term goods used in connection with the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy means equipment or materials, including raw materials, tooling machinery, and components of finished products, that enable the services described below. Goods that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including personal protective equipment, safety devices, and alarm systems.

The term services used in connection with the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy includes: new installment, additions, alteration, maintenance, and repair of manufacturing equipment; procurement or supply of raw materials for the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy; and distribution services to persons operating in the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy. Services that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the manufacturing sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including cleaning services, safety inspections, and services necessary for use of protective goods described above.

Goods or services used in connection with the textiles sector of the Iranian economy:

The term goods used in connection with the textiles sector of the Iranian economy means equipment, machines, materials, and items used in the textiles sector of the Iranian economy or that enable the services described below or the activities described in FAQ 831 with respect to the textiles sector of the Iranian economy, including: looms, industrial sewing machines, industrial washers and dryers, and industrial embroidery machinery. Goods that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the textiles sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including personal protective equipment, safety devices, and alarm systems.

The term services used in connection with the textiles sector of the Iranian economy includes: procurement or supply of raw materials for textiles production, and design of textiles products. Services that ensure the protection of life and prevention of injuries to persons operating in the textiles sector of the Iranian economy are excluded from this definition, including cleaning services, safety inspections, and services necessary for use of protective goods described above.

Goods or services used in connection with the financial sector of the Iranian economy:

On or after November 22, 2020, persons who have knowingly engaged in a significant transaction for the sale, supply, or transfer to or from Iran of significant goods or services used in connection with the financial sector of the Iranian economy risk exposure to blocking or other sanctions under E.O. 13902, unless the transaction is for a permitted transaction, such as humanitarian trade or a transaction or activity authorized for U.S. persons or otherwise described in FAQs&nbsp;844, 847, 855, or&nbsp;856.

The term goods or services used in connection with the financial sector of the Iranian economy includes new hardware or software, or upgrades to existing hardware or software, and related services, for use by Iranian financial institutions sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902 or the Iranian financial sector. It also includes financial services for transactions other than permitted transactions (e.g., humanitarian trade or transactions or activities authorized for U.S. persons or otherwise described in FAQs FAQs&nbsp;844, 847, 855, or&nbsp;856).&nbsp;&nbsp;The term does not include goods or services ordinarily incident and necessary to:

The wind down of accounts, transactions, operations, contracts, or other agreements involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian financial institution sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902 that were in effect prior to October 8, 2020.
	The maintenance of accounts, transactions, operations, contracts, and other agreements involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian financial institution sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902 that were in effect prior to October 8, 2020&nbsp;and: (i) are used in connection with permitted transactions, such as humanitarian trade or transactions or activities authorized for U.S. persons or otherwise described in FAQs&nbsp;844, 847, 855, or&nbsp;856 or (ii) are otherwise necessary for the continued processing of such permitted transactions.&nbsp;
The Department of the Treasury continues to analyze goods and services used in connection with the financial sector of the Iranian economy and may issue additional guidance about the types of goods and services that are considered sanctionable for purposes of E.O. 13902. We urge caution in any dealings involving the Iranian financial sector or with an Iranian financial institution sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902. [12-07-2020]



833. How will the terms&nbsp;''knowingly''&nbsp;and ''significant''&nbsp;be interpreted for purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13902?

As a general matter, the Department of the Treasury intends to rely, where applicable, on definitions of terms previously included in Treasury regulations.

For purposes of E.O. 13902, OFAC will rely on the definition of &quot;knowingly&quot; included in the Iranian Financial Sanctions Regulations at 31 C.F.R. § 561.314 (&quot;The term knowingly, with respect to conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the circumstance, or the result.&quot;).

In determining whether goods or services used in connection with a sector of the Iranian economy identified pursuant to E.O. 13902 are ''significant''&nbsp;the Department of the Treasury may consider the totality of the facts and circumstances. As a general matter, the Department of the Treasury may consider some or all of the following broad factors: (a) the value and number of goods or value and frequency of services; (b) the nature of the good or services, including their type, complexity, and commercial purpose; (c) the level of awareness of management and whether the provision of goods or services is part of a pattern of conduct; (d) the involvement of designated persons in transactions involving goods and services defined in FAQ 832; (e) the impact of the provision of goods or services on the objectives of E.O. 13902; (f) whether the provision of the goods or services involved deceptive practices; and (g) other relevant factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant. [06-05-2020]


Iran General License L - Authorizing Certain Transactions Involving Iranian Financial Institutions Blocked Pursuant to Executive Order 13902

842. What does General License L (GL L) authorize with respect to the financial sector of Iran and Iranian financial institutions (Iranian FIs) now sanctioned pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13902?


GL L authorizes under E.O. 13902all transactions and activities involving Iranian FIs blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that are authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR). E.O. 13902, which was issued on January 10, 2020, is not incorporated into the ITSR at this time. However, GL L effectively extends the authorizations, exemptions, and activity otherwise excluded from prohibition under the ITSR to apply to those Iranian FIs blocked under E.O. 13902. This includes, but is not limited to, (i) transactions and activities authorized by general and specific licenses issued pursuant to the ITSR and (ii) transactions and activities ordinarily incident to such transactions and activities and necessary to give effect thereto that are consistent with section 560.405 of the ITSR. For example, if a U.S. person or a U.S.-owned or -controlled foreign entity relied on a general or specific license issued pursuant to the ITSR to engage in transactions and activities involving such Iranian FIs prior to these actions under E.O. 13902, GL L provides the additional OFAC authorization needed to continue to engage in such transactions and activities.

GL L does not authorize any transactions or activities that are otherwise prohibited by the ITSR, E.O. 13902, or any other part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V.

Please note that the exemptions and authorizations in the ITSR remain otherwise applicable according to their terms. In addition, pursuant to Section 11 of E.O. 13902, the prohibitions of E.O. 13902 do not apply with respect to any person for conducting or facilitating a transaction for the provision (including any sale) of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran; pursuant to Section 12 of E.O. 13902, the prohibitions of E.O. 13902 do not apply with respect to transactions for the conduct of the official business of the United Nations (including its specialized agencies, programmes, funds, and related organizations) by employees, grantees, or contractors thereof.[10-08-2020]


843. I’m a U.S. person that relied on general or specific licenses issued pursuant to the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) to conduct humanitarian-related or other transactions and activities prior to the identification of the financial sector of Iran and sanctioning of a number of Iranian financial institutions (Iranian FIs) under E.O. 13902. Is any further authorization needed to conduct such transactions following these actions?


No. General License (GL) L extends authorizations provided through specific and general licenses issued under the ITSR to apply to transactions and activities involving Iranian FIs blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902. Further authorization from OFAC beyond GL L is not required under E.O. 13902, so long as such transactions and activities are authorized pursuant to a general license or a specific license under the ITSR, including for humanitarian-related transactions and activities authorized pursuant to the ITSR that are not covered by the exception in Section 11 of E.O. 13902.

Any transactions otherwise prohibited by the ITSR or any other part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V must be separately licensed, as appropriate.[10-08-2020]


844. Do non-U.S. persons risk exposure to U.S. secondary sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions, or other activities that would be authorized under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations and General License (GL) L if engaged in by a U.S. person, involving Iranian financial institutions (Iranian FIs) sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902?


No. Non-U.S. persons generally do not risk exposure to U.S. secondary sanctions for engaging in the sale of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran, as such transactions are generally subject to exceptions in E.O. 13902 and other applicable sanctions authorities.

However, such transactions should not involve persons designated on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) unless otherwise permitted, such as certain transactions or activities involving the Central Bank of Iran, the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), or any entity in which NIOC owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that are consistent with GL 8A.

Additionally, non-U.S. persons do not risk exposure to U.S. secondary sanctions for engaging in transactions and activities involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian FI blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that would be authorized under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) and GL L if engaged in by a U.S. person, provided such transactions and activities do not involve any person designated on the SDN List in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of WMD. [10-26-2020]


845. Will there be a wind-down period for non-U.S. persons engaged in previously non-sanctionable activity involving the Iranian financial sector or Iranian financial institutions (FIs) that are now sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902?


Yes. Non-U.S. persons engaged in transactions and activities involving the Iranian financial sector or any Iranian FI sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902 that were not previously sanctionable will have 45 days to conclude these activities without risking exposure to sanctions. The 45-day wind-down period ends on November 22, 2020. Non-U.S. persons engaged in certain activities involving Iranian FIs sanctioned under E.O. 13902 after that date may be exposed to sanctions. OFAC continues to analyze whether select types of transactions and activities may, nonetheless, be non-significant and, thus, not sanctionable even after the end of the wind-down period. OFAC anticipates issuing additional guidance regarding the scope of transactions and activity by non-U.S. persons that will become sanctionable after November 22, 2020.

Note that, even after the wind-down period, non-U.S. persons do not risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions or activities, including conducting or facilitating a transaction for the provision (including any sale) of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices to Iran, with Iranian FIs sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902. In addition, GL L authorizes under E.O. 13902 those transactions and activities involving Iranian FIs blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that are authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations. For more information, please see FAQs 842 and 844.[10-08-2020]


846. How do the sanctions imposed on the Iranian financial sector and Iranian financial institutions (FIs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13902 affect waivers issued by the Department of State and exceptions set forth in the Iranian Freedom and Counter-proliferation Act of 2012 (IFCA)?


Waivers issued by the Department of State (State) and exceptions set forth in IFCA remain valid and activities conducted under them involving Iranian FIs are not sanctionable during the wind-down period described in FAQ 845. Persons engaged in transactions or activities involving the Iranian financial sector or Iranian FIs sanctioned pursuant to E.O. 13902 that are permitted by a current State waiver or IFCA exception may continue these activities, in accordance with the conditions of those waivers or exceptions, without risking exposure to sanctions. The State Department, in consultation with OFAC, continues to assess whether these waivers and exceptions require modification prior to the close of the wind-down period to account for actions taken pursuant to E.O. 13902 and ensure uninterrupted activity, as appropriate. For more information, please contact the Department of State.[10-08-2020]


847. As a result of the sanctions on the Iranian financial sector and certain Iranian financial institutions (Iranian FIs) pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13902, do non-U.S. persons risk exposure to sanctions for continuing to engage in previously non-sanctionable trade involving the Iranian financial sector or E.O. 13902-sanctioned Iranian FIs, even after the end of the 45-day wind-down period?


For purposes of E.O. 13902, OFAC would not generally view transactions or activities by non-U.S. persons to be sanctionable if they are consistent with activities that would be permissible if conducted by U.S. persons. As noted in FAQ 842, General License (GL) L authorizes U.S. persons to engage in transactions and activities involving Iranian FIs blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that are authorized, exempt, or otherwise excluded from prohibition under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR). In addition, pursuant to Sections 11 and 12 of E.O. 13902, respectively, the prohibitions of E.O. 13902 do not apply: (i) with respect to any person for conducting or facilitating a transaction for the provision (including any sale) of agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices to Iran; or (ii) to transactions for the conduct of the official business of the United Nations (including its specialized agencies, programmes, funds, and related organizations) by employees, grantees, or contractors thereof.

For purposes of secondary sanctions, as described in FAQ 844, non-U.S. persons are not exposed to sanctions for engaging in transactions and activities involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian FI blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that would be authorized for U.S. persons under GL L.

In addition, OFAC would generally view as non-sanctionable any transactions or activities by foreign financial institutions (FFIs) and other non-U.S. persons that involve the Iranian financial sector or Iranian FIs sanctioned solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 and E.O. 13902, and that fall within the categories set forth below, to the extent such transactions or activities are not already exempt or otherwise excepted from sanctions:

The sale, supply, or transfer of goods and services to Iran – as well as intermediate goods used for manufacturing of such goods in Iran – solely for use in Iran and not for export from Iran, to ensure the protection of life, health, and safety, such as: products used for sanitation, hygiene, medical care, medical safety, and manufacturing safety, including soap, hand sanitizer, ventilators, respirators, personal hygiene products, diapers, infant and childcare items, personal protective equipment, manufacturing safety systems, safety devices, alarm systems, and ventilation systems.
	Arrangement and facilitation of travel into, out of, and within Iran, by air, sea, or land, including travel service providers and air carrier services;
	The provision of medical or healthcare services to persons in Iran or ordinarily resident in Iran; and
	The provision of educational services by academic institutions outside Iran to persons in Iran or ordinarily resident in Iran.
Please note that the guidance above applies only with respect to transactions or activities involving the Iranian financial sector or Iranian FIs sanctioned solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 and E.O. 13902. These transactions and activities should not involve persons designated on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), unless exempt or otherwise permitted. [12-07-2020]



Iran General License M - Authorizing the Exportation of Certain Graduate Level Educational Services and Software


853. Can U.S. academic institutions provide online learning services to Iranian students who are not physically present in the United States because of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic? &nbsp;Can U.S. technology companies provide software and services to assist Iranian students in accessing online coursework?

General licenses issued under the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations (ITSR) authorize certain U.S. academic institutions and other U.S. persons to provide certain services and software to Iranian students. &nbsp;These general licenses include:

General License G (GL G)&nbsp;authorizes accredited graduate and undergraduate degree-granting U.S. academic institutions, including their contractors, to export services to students located in Iran, or located outside of Iran but who are ordinarily resident in Iran (“Iranian students”), to sign up for and participate in certain undergraduate level online courses, notably: &nbsp;(i) courses in the humanities, social sciences, law, or business that are the equivalent of courses ordinarily required for the completion of undergraduate degree programs in the humanities, social sciences, law, or business; and (ii) introductory undergraduate level science, technology, engineering, or mathematics courses ordinarily required for the completion of undergraduate degree programs in the humanities, social sciences, law, or business. &nbsp;In addition, under Section 560.405 of the ITSR, certain transactions ordinarily incident to a licensed transaction are also authorized. &nbsp;OFAC interprets&nbsp;Section 560.405 of the ITSR&nbsp;to authorize certain transactions ordinarily incident to courses authorized by GL G, including the giving of assignments and testing and grading of Iranian students. &nbsp;
	General License M (GL M)&nbsp;authorizes, on a time-limited basis, accredited graduate and undergraduate degree-granting U.S. academic institutions, including their contractors, to export additional services to those Iranian students who are eligible for non-immigrant classification under categories F (students) or M (non-academic students), and have been granted a nonimmigrant visa by the U.S. State Department, but are not physically present in the United States due to the COVID-19 pandemic. &nbsp;Specifically, GL M authorizes the provision of certain online educational services related to: &nbsp;educational courses that are (i) the equivalent of courses ordinarily required for the completion of graduate degree programs in the humanities, social sciences, law, or business; and (ii) introductory science, technology, engineering, or mathematics courses ordinarily required for the completion of graduate degree programs in the humanities, social sciences, law, or business. &nbsp;OFAC interprets Section 560.405 of the ITSR to authorize certain transactions ordinarily incident to courses authorized by GL M, including the giving of assignments and testing and grading of Iranian students. &nbsp;GL M also authorizes the exportation of certain software to facilitate the participation of certain Iranian students in certain online educational activities, as explained further below. &nbsp;GL M authorizes covered activities through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time September 1, 2021.
	Section 560.540 of the ITSR&nbsp;and&nbsp;General License D-1&nbsp;authorize the exportation to Iran of certain services and software incident to the exchange of personal communications over the Internet, such as instant messaging, chat and email, social networking, sharing of photos and movies, web browsing, and blogging. &nbsp;OFAC interprets these authorizations to cover video conferencing software and related services, as well as educational technology software and related services, that allow students to view courses and course materials, complete tests and assignments, receive grades, participate in discussions, and other, similar course-related online activity, provided that the software meets the additional criteria of the applicable authorization. &nbsp;For more guidance on Section 560.540 of the ITSR and General License D-1, please see FAQs 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, and 443. &nbsp;In addition, GL M also authorizes the exportation of certain software in order to facilitate participation in online educational activities described in GL G and GL M by Iranian students who are eligible for non-immigrant classification under categories F (students) or M (non-academic students), and have been granted a nonimmigrant visa by the U.S. State Department, but are not physically present in the United States due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
To export services to Iranian students that fall outside of these authorizations, U.S. persons may apply for a specific license through the OFAC&nbsp;License Application Page. &nbsp;OFAC is committed to mitigating the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and prioritizes the review of specific license applications to provide online learning services to Iranian students who are not physically present in the United States because of the COVID-19 pandemic. &nbsp;

Please note that the general licenses summarized above do not authorize the exportation of goods (including software), services, or technology to the Government of Iran or to persons blocked under any authority administered by OFAC, including OFAC’s counterterrorism or counterproliferation authorities.&nbsp;[10-29-2020]


Executive Order (E.O.) 13902, &quot;Imposing Sanctions With Respect to Additional Sectors of Iran&quot;

855. How will transactions related to official activities of international organizations be treated for purposes of secondary sanctions to the extent that the Iranian financial sector or Iranian financial institutions sanctioned under Executive Order (E.O.) 13902 are involved?


Pursuant to Section 12 of E.O. 13902, the prohibitions of E.O. 13902 do not apply to transactions for the conduct of the official business of the United Nations (including its specialized agencies, programmes, funds, and related organizations) by employees, grantees, or contractors thereof. In addition, transactions and activities involving an Iranian financial institution (Iranian FI) blocked under E.O. 13902 are authorized under General License (GL) L to the extent they are authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited by the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR). Section 560.539 of the ITSR authorizes transactions for the official business of certain international organizations, including the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies, Programmes, Funds, and Related Organizations, including the World Bank Group, the International Monetary Fund, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the International Labor Organization, and the World Health Organization.

For purposes of secondary sanctions, as described in FAQ 844, non-U.S. persons are not exposed to sanctions for engaging in transactions and activities involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian FI blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that would be authorized for U.S. persons under GL L.

In addition, Treasury will generally view the following additional transactions by non-U.S. persons involving Iranian FIs blocked solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 and E.O. 13902&nbsp;or the Iranian financial sector, as non-sanctionable:

The operating expenses or other official business of missions in Iran of international organizations in which Iran is a member or participant, or for the personal use of employees of the missions; and
	The operating expenses or other official business associated with the Government of Iran’s missions to international organizations in which Iran is a member or participant, or for the personal use of employees of the missions, including the provision of routine goods and services to such missions or their employees by non-U.S. persons.
Please note that the guidance above applies only with respect to transactions or activities involving the Iranian financial sector or Iranian FIs sanctioned solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 and E.O. 13902. These transactions and activities should not involve persons designated on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), unless exempt or otherwise permitted. [12-07-2020]


856. How will transactions related to Iran’s participation in legal proceedings, including administrative, judicial, arbitral proceedings, and proceedings before international courts and tribunals, be treated for purposes of secondary sanctions to the extent that Iranian financial institutions or the Iranian financial sector sanctioned under Executive Order (E.O.) 13902 are involved?


Transactions and activities involving Iranian financial institutions blocked under E.O. 13902 remain authorized under General License (GL) L to the extent they are authorized, exempt, or otherwise not prohibited by the Iranian Transactions and Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 560 (ITSR). This authorization includes certain transactions and activities relating to the initiation and conduct of legal proceedings authorized or otherwise permitted pursuant to section 560.510 or 560.525 of the ITSR, such as transactions or activities related to the defense of individuals in legal proceedings in Iran brought by the Government of Iran, including any arrest, investigation, prosecution, or detention. Such permissible transactions and activities may include reasonable and customary payments for the provision of legal services, bail and/or bond payments, judicial costs and fees, costs for the production of documents and appearances of witnesses, and payment of experts.

In addition, for purposes of secondary sanctions, as described in FAQ 844, non-U.S. persons are not exposed to sanctions for engaging in transactions and activities involving the Iranian financial sector or an Iranian FI blocked pursuant to E.O. 13902 that would be authorized for U.S. persons under GL L.

Please note that, unless permitted by GL L and FAQ 844, payments made to Iran involving blocked Iranian persons — including the Government of Iran, including any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof — in connection with awards, orders, decisions, or settlement of claims may be subject&nbsp;to sanctions. OFAC will assess such transactions on a case-by-case basis.

Please also note that guidance above applies only with respect to transactions or activities involving Iranian FIs sanctioned solely pursuant to E.O. 13599 and E.O. 13902 or the Iranian financial sector. These transactions and activities should not involve persons designated on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List) in connection with Iran’s support for international terrorism or proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) unless exempt or otherwise permitted. [12-07-2020]

&nbsp;

Syria Sanctions



The United States government is working with the international community to provide urgently needed humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people while applying comprehensive sanctions against the Government of Syria and targeted sanctions on key individuals and entities supporting the Assad regime, in order to continue pressuring the Syrian government to stop its human rights abuses and other illicit activities. The following frequently asked questions provide an overview of the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Syria sanctions program and guidance to the public on sending remittances, goods and services, and charitable assistance to Syria.

For additional Treasury guidance on protecting charitable donations from abuse, please view this document or visit this website. Additional questions may be directed to Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) hotline at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490.


225. Why does the United States have sanctions against Syria and what does that mean for me?

The United States has sanctioned the Syrian government, including the Central Bank of Syria, senior Syrian government officials, and individuals and entities supporting the Assad regime and/or responsible for human rights abuses in Syria, in order to reinforce the President’s call that Bashar al-Assad step down and to disrupt the Assad regime’s ability to finance its campaign of violence against the Syrian people. In addition, Treasury has sanctioned the Commercial Bank of Syria and a number of other entities under Executive Order 13382, an authority that targets proliferators of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their supporters. Over the years Treasury has applied a broad range of sanctions using several different authorities and Executive orders (E.O.s), including counter-terrorism (E.O. 13224), human rights abuses (E.O. 13572), and non-proliferation (E.O. 13382). The United States has also prohibited the exportation of services to Syria, and there have long been legal restrictions on what goods U.S. persons can export to Syria.

These sanctions mean that U.S. persons are not permitted to do business with individuals or entities on OFAC’s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), or with any entity 50 percent or more owned by an Specially Designated National (SDN), unless exempt or authorized by OFAC through a general or specific license.



226. How can I help the Syrian people while making sure to abide by the U.S. sanctions?

Recognizing that the Syrian people need many critical services and goods, OFAC has issued several general licenses that, among other things, allow all U.S. persons to send non-commercial, personal remittances to Syrian persons without needing to apply to OFAC for a separate or specific license. Moreover, U.S. persons may donate humanitarian goods like food and medicine to people in Syria, as long as such donations are consistent with Commerce and OFAC regulations.

Finally, OFAC has also issued a general license to allow nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to engage in not-for-profit activities in Syria in support of humanitarian projects, democracy-building, education, and non-commercial development projects directly benefitting the Syrian people. Copies of all OFAC general licenses issued for Syria can be found here. For any activities that fall outside of these general licenses, specific authorization from OFAC would be required, unless the transactions fall within a small category that are exempt from regulation by statute.

As mentioned above, one of the goals of the U.S. sanctions on Syria is to reinforce the President’s call for Bashar al-Assad to step down and to disrupt the Assad regime’s ability to finance its campaign of violence against the Syrian people. OFAC can issue a specific license to authorize particular transactions that may otherwise be prohibited by the sanctions, as long as those transactions are in the foreign policy interests of the United States. For example, specific licenses may be issued on a case-by case basis to authorize charitable donations of funds that would otherwise be prohibited by the Syrian sanctions regime.



229. Do I need a specific license from OFAC to send U.S.-origin food or medicine to Syria? 

No. You may send U.S.-origin food or medicine to Syria without a specific license from OFAC. The Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security (“BIS”), which maintains jurisdiction over the export of most items to Syria, does not require a license for the export of U.S.-origin food and most medicine to Syria. For further guidance regarding the exportation of items to Syria, including a list of such items, please review the BIS Syria Web page, or contact BIS by phone at (202) 482-4252.



230. Can I give donations to NGOs to help the Syrian people? 

Yes. U.S. persons can give a charitable donation to U.S. or third-country NGOs, but U.S. persons cannot send such a donation directly to Syria or a Syrian entity without a specific license in order to try to protect the donations from being misused. U.S. depository institutions, including banks, and U.S.-registered money transmitters, are allowed to process transfers of funds to or from Syria on behalf of U.S. NGOs and third-country NGOs in support of the not-for-profit activities described in OFAC General License No. 11.*

These not-for-profit activities include: (1) activities to support humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs in Syria, including drought relief, assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons, and conflict victims, food and medicine distribution, and the provision of health services; (2) activities to support democracy building in Syria, including rule of law, citizen participation, government accountability, and civil society development projects; (3) activities to support education in Syria, including combating illiteracy, increasing access to education, and assisting education reform projects; and (4) activities to support non-commercial development projects directly benefiting the Syrian people, including preventing infectious disease and promoting maternal/child health, sustainable agriculture, and clean water assistance.

General License No. 11 does not authorize transactions with the Government of Syria or other blocked persons, except for limited transactions with the Government of Syria that are necessary for the above-described not-for-profit activities, such as payment of taxes and other fees.

*For guidance on specific questions with respect to charitable donations, NGOs, and the scope of General License No. 11, please reach out to OFAC. Contact information may be found here.



231. Can U.S. NGOs deliver humanitarian assistance directly to Syria? 

Yes. U.S. NGOs may provide services to Syria in support of humanitarian projects in Syria without the need for a specific license from OFAC because this activity is covered under OFAC General License No. 11. However, other U.S. government authorities, including the BIS export requirements, may apply to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Syria. For further guidance, please review the BIS Syria Web page or contact BIS or contact BIS by phone at (202) 482-4252.

NGOs considering entering Syria to conduct assistance operations should be aware that areas of Syria are extremely unstable and dangerous, and should review the State Department’s Travel Warning for Syria http://travel.state.gov/content/passports/english/alertswarnings/syria-travel-warning.html.

U.S. persons should exercise caution not to engage in prohibited transactions with the Syrian Government or any individual or entity on OFAC’s SDN list.



135. Are travel-related transactions permissible under the new Syria Executive order 13582?

Yes. The new Syria Executive order, Executive Order 13582, does not prohibit U.S. persons from engaging in transactions ordinarily incident to travel to or from any country, including importation of accompanied baggage for personal use, maintenance within any country including payment of living expenses and acquisition of goods or services for personal use, and arrangement or facilitation or such travel including nonscheduled air, sea, or land voyages. [08-17-2011]



Syria General License No. 4: Exports or reexports to Syria of items subject to the Export Administration Regulations

136. What does the term &quot;items&quot; cover, and what is meant by items subject to the Export Administration Regulations?

&nbsp;


For the purposes of OFAC Syria General License No. 4A, &quot;items subject to the EAR&quot; is defined at § 734.3 of the Export Administration Regulations (&quot;EAR&quot;), 15 C.F.R. Parts 730-774.The EAR are administered by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security (&quot;BIS&quot;). Note that BIS maintains authority to license exports and reexports to persons in Syria whose property and interests have been blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13606 (the “GHRAVITY E.O.”). For further guidance regarding the exportation or reexportation of items to Syria, please consult the EAR. You may also wish to review the BIS Syria Web page or contact BIS by phone at (202) 482-4252. [06-22-2012]



137. Regarding OFAC Syria General License No. 4A, will I need a specific license from OFAC to export or reexport food or medicine to the Government of Syria? 

The export or reexport of food or medicine that is subject to the EAR to the Government of Syria, other than medicine on the Commerce Control List that has not been licensed by BIS for export or reexport to Syria, does not require a specific license from OFAC.

As set forth in the EAR, which implements the Syria Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Restoration Act of 2003 (&quot;SAA&quot;) and Executive Order 13338 of May 11, 2004, BIS does not require a license for the export or reexport of &quot;EAR99&quot; food and medicine; accordingly, EAR99 food and medicine can be exported or reexported to the Government of Syria on a &quot;NLR&quot; (&quot;No License Required&quot;) basis, under the regulations administered by BIS.

Additionally, as set forth in the EAR, a BIS license is required for the export or reexport of medicine that is on the Commerce Control List (&quot;CCL medicine&quot;). If BIS has licensed the export or reexport of CCL medicine to the Government of Syria, no specific OFAC license is required. [06-22-2012]



138. Does General License No. 4A authorize U.S. persons to export or reexport from a third country to Syria or the Government of Syria a foreign-made item with either no U.S. content or de minimis U.S. content? 

General License No. 4A only applies to items that are subject to the EAR, as set forth in 15 C.F.R. § 734.3. If a foreign-made item located abroad is not subject to the EAR based on the regulations administered by BIS, the exportation or reexportation of such items by U.S. persons to the Government Syria and the reexportation of services incident to an exportation of such items to Syria are not authorized by General License No. 4A. Because Executive Order 13582 generally prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in transactions with the Government of Syria and separately prohibits the exportation, reexportation, sale, or supply, directly or indirectly, by a United States person, wherever located, of any services to Syria, such transactions remain prohibited. [06-22-12]




Syria General License No. 6

227. May I continue to send money to family or friends in Syria? 


Yes. OFAC General License No. 6 authorizes U.S. depository institutions, including banks, and U.S.-registered money transmitters, to process non-commercial, personal remittances to or from Syria, or for or on behalf of an individual ordinarily resident in Syria, provided the funds transfer is not by, to, or through the Government of Syria or any other person designated or otherwise blocked by OFAC. Such transactions do not require further authorization from OFAC. If banks or other institutions have questions about processing remittances, they can contact OFAC’s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division via the OFAC hotline at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490.



228. May I send personal remittances through the Commercial Bank of Syria, the Syrian-Lebanese Commercial Bank, or the Syria International Islamic Bank (SIIB) to family or friends in Syria?

No. General License No. 6 does not authorize any transactions involving individuals or entities designated under E.O. 13382, which targets proliferators of weapons of mass destruction and their supporters, including the Commercial Bank of Syria, the Syrian Lebanese Commercial Bank, and the SIIB. On August 10, 2011, under Executive Order 13382, the Department of the Treasury designated the Commercial Bank of Syria for its involvement in proliferation activities, and also designated its subsidiary, the Syrian-Lebanese Commercial Bank. On May 30, 2012, the Department of the Treasury also designated the SIIB. Therefore, the use of these financial institutions is not authorized by General License No. 6.




Syria General License No. 11: Authorizing Services in Support of Nongovernmental Organizations’ Activities in Syria

205. Who is authorized to send money to support certain nongovernmental organizations’ activities? 


U.S. depository institutions, U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S. registered money transmitters are authorized to process transfers of funds to or from Syria on behalf of U.S. and third-country nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), in support of the not-for-profit activities described in General License No. 11. These not-for-profit activities include: (1) activities to support humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs in Syria, including, but not limited to, drought relief, assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons, and conflict victims, food and medicine distribution, and the provision of health services; (2) activities to support democracy building in Syria, including, but not limited to, rule of law, citizen participation, government accountability, and civil society development projects; (3) activities to support education in Syria, including, but not limited to, combating illiteracy, increasing access to education, and assisting education reform projects; and (4) activities to support non-commercial development projects directly benefiting the Syrian people, including, but not limited to, preventing infectious disease and promoting maternal/child health, sustainable agriculture, and clean water assistance. Except for limited transactions with the Government of Syria, General License No. 11 does not authorize the transfer of funds to the Government of Syria or other blocked persons. [06-22-2012]



206. As an individual, may I transfer funds directly to Syria in support of authorized NGO activities under General License No. 11? 

No. Only U.S. depository institutions, U.S. registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S. registered money transmitters are authorized to process such transfers of funds, and only on behalf of U.S or third-country NGOs. Although individuals may not transfer funds directly to Syria in support of authorized NGO activities under General License No. 11, please note that, pursuant to General License No. 6, individuals may send noncommercial, personal remittances to individuals in Syria provided that, among other things, the Government of Syria is not involved. However, General License No. 6 provides that “noncommercial, personal remittances” do not include charitable donations of funds to or for the benefit of any entity or funds transfers for use in supporting or operating a business. Please see General License No. 6 for further details.

If you wish to donate funds in support of humanitarian work in Syria, you may do so by transferring funds to an NGO to support its work in Syria. If you wish to send a charitable donation directly to Syria, you must apply for specific authorization to transmit such funds. [06-22-2012]



232. As an individual, can I send financial donations directly to Syria in support of charitable activities under General License No. 11?

No. Without a specific license, U.S. persons are not permitted to transfer financial donations directly to Syria or to NGOs in Syria. Therefore, if you wish to donate funds in support of humanitarian work in Syria, you may do so by giving funds to U.S. or third-country NGOs to support not-for-profit activities in Syria, per General License No. 11 and as described above.

If you still wish to send a charitable donation directly to Syria or to a Syrian NGO, you may apply to OFAC for specific authorization to transmit such funds. You should provide as much information as possible about how the funds would be transferred, the recipients, and the end use of the funds. Although General License No. 6 does not authorize charitable donations, as mentioned above non-commercial, personal remittances can be sent to Syria under GL No. 6.



Grave Human Rights Abuses by the Governments of Iran and Syria Via Information Technology (the “GHRAVITY E.O.”)

For information regarding the GHRAVITY E.O., please see the following topic.

Foreign Sanctions Evaders (FSEs) and Executive Order 13608 (Prohibiting Certain Transactions with and Suspending Entry into the United States of Foreign Sanctions Evaders with Respect to Iran and Syria)

&nbsp;

For information regarding FSEs and Executive Order 13608, please see the following topic.


Syria General License No. 20: Authorizing Transactions and Activities Necessary for Wind Down of Transactions with Emma Tel LLC

841. What does Syria General License 20 authorize?


Syria General License (GL) 20 authorizes, subject to certain conditions, all transactions and activities prohibited by the Syrian Sanctions Regulations (SySR) that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of transactions involving, directly or indirectly, Emma Tel LLC or any entity in which Emma Tel LLC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, through 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, December 30, 2020. Persons unable to wind down transactions prohibited by the SySR involving, directly or indirectly, Emma Tel LLC, or any entity in which Emma Tel LLC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, before 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, December 30, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC.

For the duration of GL 20, non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions involving, directly or indirectly, Emma Tel LLC, or any entity in which Emma Tel LLC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, without exposure to sanctions under the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019, provided that such wind down activity is consistent with GL 20. While GL 20 is in effect, wind down transactions involving non-U.S. persons may be processed through the U.S. financial system or involve U.S. persons, as long as the transactions comply with the terms and conditions in GL 20. Non-U.S. persons unable to wind down transactions involving, directly or indirectly, Emma Tel LLC or any entity in which Emma Tel LLC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest before 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, December 30, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC.[09/30/2020]

&nbsp;




866. What prohibitions apply to the Central Bank of Syria (CBoS)? 

The Central Bank of Syria (CBoS) is blocked as part of the Government of Syria, as defined in E.O. 13582 of August 17, 2011 and the Syrian Sanctions Regulations (SySR), 31 C.F.R. Part 542. On December 22, 2020, OFAC identified the CBoS on the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List), further underscoring its blocked status. This identification does not trigger new prohibitions on the CBoS. All property and interests in property of the CBoS remain blocked.

Among other things, the SySR generally prohibit U.S. persons, unless exempt or authorized, from engaging in any transaction or dealing in property and interests in property of certain blocked persons, including the CBoS. This also includes the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked, again including the CBoS. The SySR also prohibit the export, reexport, sale, and supply of services to Syria (unless exempt or authorized), which would include services involving the CBoS in Syria.

Pursuant to the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019, non-U.S. persons who knowingly provide significant financial, material, or technological support to, or knowingly engage in a significant transaction with the Government of Syria, including the CBoS, or certain other persons sanctioned with respect to Syria, risk exposure to sanctions.

General and specific licenses under the SySR applicable to the CBoS continue to apply, including authorizations for the provision of humanitarian assistance and certain trade to Syria that may involve the CBoS. For more information regarding authorizations for humanitarian assistance and other trade with Syria by U.S. and non-U.S. persons, please see FAQ 867. [12-22-2020]



867. Can U.S. and non-U.S. persons provide humanitarian assistance to Syria following the identification of the Central Bank of Syria (CBoS) on the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List)? 

Yes. The identification of the CBoS on the SDN List does not trigger new prohibitions; existing general and specific licenses under the Syrian Sanctions Regulations (SySR), 31 C.F.R. Part 542, continue to apply as they did previously. U.S. persons may continue engaging with the CBoS in connection with humanitarian assistance and certain other trade with Syria authorized by the SySR or exempt from regulation, including: § 542.510 (Exports or reexports to Syria of items licensed or otherwise authorized by the Department of Commerce authorized; exports or reexports of certain services authorized); § 542.513 (Official activities of certain international organizations authorized); § 542.516 (Certain services in support of nongovernmental organizations’ activities authorized); and § 542.525 (Exportation or reexportation of services to Syria related to the exportation or reexportation of certain non-U.S.-origin goods authorized). Of note, the export of U.S.-origin food and most medicines to Syria is not prohibited and does not require a Commerce or OFAC license (see 31 CFR § 542.510 and Syria FAQ 229), and U.S. persons can continue engaging with the CBoS in connection with these transactions. For more information on the most relevant exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations for humanitarian assistance and trade under the Syria sanctions program, please see OFAC’s April 16, 2020 Fact Sheet: Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Trade to Combat COVID-19.

In addition, OFAC may issue specific licenses to authorize certain transactions involving U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system that may otherwise be prohibited by OFAC sanctions, provided those transactions are in the foreign policy interests of the United States. OFAC has a longstanding licensing policy supporting the provision of humanitarian assistance.

With respect to non-U.S. persons, OFAC will not consider transactions to be “significant” for the purpose of a sanctions determination under the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019 (Caesar Act) if U.S. persons would not require a specific license from OFAC to participate in such a transaction. Accordingly, non-U.S. persons would not risk exposure to sanctions under the Caesar Act for engaging in activity with the CBoS that is authorized for U.S. persons under a general license in the SySR, such as transactions involving the provision of humanitarian assistance or export of humanitarian goods to Syria. Further, the Caesar Act codifies, with some exceptions, the general license in § 542.516 of the SySR that authorizes certain services in support of nongovernmental organizations, and includes a humanitarian waiver.

OFAC remains committed to ensuring that humanitarian assistance can flow to the people of Syria. Treasury continues to support the critical work of governments, certain international organizations, non-profit organizations, and individuals delivering food, medicine, medical supplies, and humanitarian assistance to civilians in Syria. If individuals, companies, or financial institutions have questions about engaging in or processing transactions related to these authorizations, they can contact OFAC’s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490. [12-22-2020]



868. I am a non-U.S. person that engages in humanitarian-related transactions or activity with Polymedics LLC and Letia Company. Do I now face exposure to sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions or activity with these companies? 

As described in FAQ 867, non-U.S. persons would not risk exposure to sanctions for engaging in humanitarian-related transactions or activity with Polymedics LLC and Letia Company that are exempt from regulation or authorized for U.S. persons by a general license in the Syrian Sanctions Regulations (SySR), 31 C.F.R. Part 542, such as transactions involving the provision of humanitarian assistance or export of humanitarian goods to Syria.

Additionally, the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019 (Caesar Act) codifies, with some exceptions, the general license in § 542.516 of the SySR, which authorizes certain services in support of nongovernmental organizations and includes a humanitarian waiver. [12-22-2020]



884. Do non-U.S. persons, including nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and foreign financial institutions, risk exposure to U.S. secondary sanctions pursuant to the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019 (Caesar Act) for activities that would be authorized under the Syrian Sanctions Regulations (SySR)? 

With respect to non-U.S. persons, OFAC will not consider transactions to be “significant” for the purpose of a sanctions determination under the Caesar Act if U.S. persons would not require a specific license from OFAC to participate in such a transaction. Accordingly, non-U.S. persons, including NGOs and foreign financial institutions, would not risk exposure to sanctions under the Caesar Act for engaging in activity, or facilitating transactions and payments for such activity, that is authorized for U.S. persons under a general license (GL) issued pursuant to the SySR. For a list of GLs within the SySR related to humanitarian assistance and trade with Syria, please see OFAC’s April 16, 2020 Fact Sheet: Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Trade to Combat COVID-19. Further, Section 7425 of the Caesar Act codifies, with some exceptions, the general license in § 542.516 of the SySR that authorizes certain services in support of NGOs. Additionally, Section 7432 of the Caesar Act includes a humanitarian waiver for activities not otherwise covered by GL § 542.516 of the SySR.

Please note that this guidance with respect to non-U.S. persons does not apply to transactions and activities that may be subject to sanctions under other sanctions programs administered by OFAC (e.g., transactions with blocked persons designated under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224 (OFAC’s counterterrorism authority) or E.O. 13894 (OFAC’s Syria-related authority)), unless exempt or otherwise permitted by OFAC. [04-05-2021]



885. May U.S. and non-U.S. persons, including nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and foreign financial institutions, provide or facilitate certain humanitarian assistance to Syria without the risk of sanctions? 

Yes. The export of U.S.-origin food and most medicines to Syria is not prohibited and does not require a Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) or OFAC license (see 31 CFR § 542.510, 15 CFR § 746.9, and Syria FAQ 229), and therefore non-U.S. persons would not risk exposure to sanctions under the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019 (Caesar Act) for engaging in such activity. See FAQ 884. For questions specific to transactions involving items subject to the Export Administration Regulations destined to Syria, please contact the BIS Foreign Policy Division at Foreign.Policy@bis.doc.gov. Additionally, U.S. persons providing services ordinarily incident to the export or reexport of certain non-U.S.-origin food and most medicines to Syria is not prohibited and does not require an OFAC specific license (see 31 CFR § 542.525), and therefore non-U.S. persons would not risk exposure to sanctions under the Caesar Act for engaging in such activity. For more information on the most relevant exemptions, exceptions, and authorizations for humanitarian assistance and trade under the Syria sanctions program, please see OFAC’s April 16, 2020 Fact Sheet: Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Trade to Combat COVID-19.

OFAC remains committed to ensuring that humanitarian assistance can flow to the people of Syria and maintains a favorable policy supporting the provision of humanitarian assistance. Treasury continues to support the critical work of governments, certain international organizations, NGOs, and individuals delivering food, medicine, medical supplies, and humanitarian assistance to civilians in Syria. In an effort to ensure assistance reaches those in need, we encourage individuals, companies, or financial institutions who have questions about engaging in or processing transactions related to these authorizations, to contact OFAC’s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490. [04-05-2021]


&nbsp;



Ukraine-/Russia-related Sanctions


370. What do the prohibitions in Directives 1 and 2 mean? &nbsp;Are they blocking actions?

The sectoral sanctions imposed on specified persons operating in sectors of the Russian economy identified by the Secretary of the Treasury were done under&nbsp;Executive Order 13662&nbsp;through&nbsp;Directives&nbsp;issued by OFAC pursuant to its delegated authorities. &nbsp;Directive 1, as amended on September 29, 2017 in accordance with section 223(b) of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act of 2017 (CAATSA) (Pub. L. 115-44), prohibits transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt of specified tenors or equity if that debt or equity was or is issued on or after the relevant sanctions effective date (&quot;new debt&quot; or &quot;new equity&quot;) by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the persons operating in Russia’s financial sector named under Directive 1, their property, or their interests in property.

There were two prior (and now superseded) versions of Directive 1, which were issued on July 16, 2014 and September 12, 2014.&nbsp; The prior versions of Directive 1 prohibited the same activities, but involving debt of longer than 90 days maturity (July 16, 2014 version) and 30 days maturity (September 12, 2014 version) or equity if that debt or equity was issued on or after the date a person was determined to be subject to Directive 1.&nbsp;&nbsp;

The relevant tenors of prohibited debt under Directive 1 are noted in the table below.

Directive 1
		
			Period when the debt was issued
			
			
			Applicable tenor of prohibited debt
			
		
			On or after July 16, 2014 and before September 12, 2014
			
			
			Longer than 90 days maturity
			
		
			On or after September 12, 2014 and before November 28, 2017
			
			
			Longer than 30 days maturity
			
		
			On or after November 28, 2017
			
			
			Longer than 14 days maturity
			
		Directive 2, as amended on September 29, 2017 in accordance with section 223(c) of CAATSA, prohibits transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new debt of specified tenors by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the persons operating in Russia’s energy sector named under Directive 2, their property, or their interests in property.&nbsp;

There were two prior (and now superseded) versions of Directive 2, which were issued on July 16, 2014 and September 12, 2014.&nbsp; The prior versions of Directive 2 prohibited the same activities, but involving debt of longer than 90 days maturity if that debt was issued on or after the date a person was determined to be subject to Directive 2.

The relevant tenors of prohibited debt under Directive 2 are noted in the table below.

Directive 2 
		
			Period when the debt was issued
			
			
			Applicable tenor of prohibited debt
			
		
			On or after July 16, 2014 and before November 28, 2017
			
			
			Longer than 90 days maturity
			
		
			On or after November 28, 2017
			
			
			Longer than 60 days maturity
			
		Directives 1 and 2 prohibit transactions by U.S. persons as defined in E.O. 13662, wherever they are located, and transactions within the United States. &nbsp;Directives 1 and 2 do not require U.S. persons to block the property or interests in property of the entities identified in the Directives, nor will persons identified in Directives 1 and 2 automatically be added to the Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List. &nbsp;U.S. persons should reject transactions or dealings that are prohibited by Directives 1 or 2, and to the extent required by section 501.604 of the Reporting, Procedures and Penalties Regulations (31 C.F.R. part 501), U.S. persons must report to OFAC any rejected transactions within 10 business days. [11-28-2017]



371. What does OFAC interpret to be debt and equity? &nbsp;Are there other prohibited activities under Directives 1, 2, and 3? &nbsp;Can U.S. financial institutions continue to maintain correspondent accounts and process U.S. dollar-clearing transactions for the entities subject to these Directives?

The term&nbsp;debt&nbsp;includes bonds, loans, extensions of credit, loan guarantees, letters of credit, drafts, bankers acceptances, discount notes or bills, or commercial paper. &nbsp;The term&nbsp;equity&nbsp;includes stocks, share issuances, depositary receipts, or any other evidence of title or ownership.

The prohibitions in Directive 1 apply to all transactions involving&nbsp;new debt&nbsp;of specified tenors (see FAQ 370) or&nbsp;new equity; all financing in support of such new debt or new equity; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such new debt or new equity.&nbsp;

For example, for debt that is issued on or after November 28, 2017, on behalf of or for the benefit of a person subject to Directive 1, the maturity of this instrument must be 14 days or less in order for a U.S. person to transact in, to provide financing for, or to otherwise deal in this debt.&nbsp;

For debt that is issued on or after September 12, 2014 but before November 28, 2017, on behalf of or for the benefit of a person subject to Directive 1, the maturity of this instrument must be 30 days or less in order for a U.S. person to transact in, to provide financing for, or to otherwise deal in this debt. &nbsp;If the terms of the agreement do not subsequently change as described in FAQ 394, then a U.S. person may deal in such debt even after the 14-day debt limit comes into effect on November 28, 2017 because such debt would not constitute “new debt” for purposes of the sanctions applicable on or after November 28, 2017.

Likewise, for debt that is issued on or after July 16, 2014 but before September 12, 2014, on behalf of or for the benefit of a person subject to Directive 1, the maturity of this instrument must be 90 days or less in order for a U.S. person to transact in, to provide financing for, or to otherwise deal in this debt.&nbsp; If the terms of the agreement do not subsequently change as described in FAQ 394, then a U.S. person may deal in such debt even after the revised tenors come into effect on September 12, 2014 or November 28, 2017 because such debt would not constitute “new debt” for purposes of the sanctions applicable on those dates.

The prohibitions in Directive 2 apply to all transactions involving&nbsp;new debt&nbsp;of specified tenors (see FAQ 370); all financing in support of such new debt; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such new debt.&nbsp;

For example, for debt that is issued on or after November 28, 2017, on behalf of or for the benefit of a person subject to Directive 2, the maturity of this instrument must be 60 days or less in order for a U.S. person to transact in, to provide financing for, or to otherwise deal in this debt.

For debt that is issued on or after July 16, 2014 but before November 28, 2017, on behalf of or for the benefit of a person subject to Directive 2, the maturity of this instrument must be 90 days or less in order for a U.S. person to transact in, to provide financing for, or to otherwise deal in this debt.&nbsp; If the terms of the agreement do not subsequently change as described in FAQ 394, then a U.S. person may deal in such debt even after the 60-day debt limit comes into effect on November 28, 2017 because such debt would not constitute “new debt” for purposes of the sanctions applicable on or after November 28, 2017.

The prohibitions in Directive 3 apply to all transactions involving&nbsp;new debt&nbsp;with a maturity of longer than 30 days; all financing in support of such new debt; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such new debt.

All the prohibitions in these Directives extend to rollover of existing debt, if such rollover results in the creation of new debt with a maturity of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive (see FAQ 394).

Transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in any debt issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of persons subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3, or equity issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of persons subject to Directive 1, is permissible, if the debt or equity was issued prior to the date on which the person became subject to the relevant Directive. &nbsp;In addition, transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt instruments with tenors shorter than the specified tenors, even if they are issued after the sanctions effective date, is permissible. &nbsp;Transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new equity instruments of persons subject to Directives 2 and 3 is permissible. &nbsp;U.S. financial institutions may continue to maintain correspondent accounts and process U.S. dollar-clearing transactions for the persons subject to the Directives, so long as those activities do not involve transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in transaction types prohibited by these Directives.

In the case of Directive 1, transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt with a maturity of 90 days or less (if issued on or after July 16, 2014 but prior to September 12, 2014) or 30 days or less (if issued on or after September 12, 2014 but prior to November 28, 2017) that was issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the persons subject to Directive 1 is not prohibited if the terms of such instruments do not change subsequently (see&nbsp;FAQ 394&nbsp;for additional detail on what constitutes the changing of terms). &nbsp;Similarly, in the case of Directive 2, transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt with a maturity of 90 days or less (if issued on or after July 16, 2014 but prior to November 28, 2017) that was issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the persons subject to Directive 2 is not prohibited if the terms of such instruments do not change subsequently.&nbsp; Rollovers of such instruments must comply with the new Directive 1 and 2 maturity limits that came into effect on November 28, 2017. [11-28-2017]



372. Do Directives 1, 2, and 3 prohibit U.S. persons from entering into derivatives contracts linked to new debt or new equity issued by the entities subject to the Directives?

On November 28, 2017, OFAC issued&nbsp;General License 1B,&nbsp;which continues to authorize certain transactions involving derivative products that would otherwise be prohibited pursuant to Directives 1, 2, or 3. &nbsp;General License 1B&nbsp;replaced and superseded General License No. 1A, dated September 12, 2014. [11-28-2017]



373. Do the prohibitions imposed pursuant to the Directives also extend to entities owned 50 percent or more by one or more entities identified by these Directives, as per revised guidance OFAC issued on August 13, 2014? 

Yes, these prohibitions apply to the named persons, their property, and their interests in property, which includes entities owned 50 percent or more by one or more persons identified as subject to the Directives.

On October 31, 2017, OFAC amended and reissued Directive 4 in accordance with Section 223(d) of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) (Pub. L. 115-44). For additional information regarding what amended Directive 4 prohibits, see FAQ #412. The amendments to Directive 4 do not change the applicability of OFAC’s 50 percent rule in the Directive 4 context. The references to “33 percent or greater ownership” and “ownership of a majority of the voting interests” in subsection 2 of Directive 4 refer to a Directive 4 SSI entity’s ownership interest in a deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale project. [10-31-2017]



550. When OFAC references a prohibition involving an “SSI entity” in these FAQs or in other guidance, what does that term mean?

When OFAC uses the term &quot;SSI entity&quot; in these FAQs or in other guidance, it is referring to an entity subject to the Directive(s) at issue in a particular FAQ or piece of guidance.&nbsp; [11-28-2017]



374. If I own a Kalashnikov product, is that product blocked by sanctions? Am I able to resell a Kalashnikov product at a gun show or other secondary market? 

If a U.S. person is in possession of a Kalashnikov Concern product that was bought and fully paid for prior to the date of designation (i.e., no payment remains due to Kalashnikov Concern), then that product is not blocked and OFAC sanctions would not prohibit the U.S. person from keeping or selling the product in the secondary market, so long as Kalashnikov Concern has no interest in the transaction. New transactions by U.S. persons with Kalashnikov Concern are prohibited, however, and any property in which Kalashnikov Concern has an interest is blocked pursuant to OFAC’s designation of Kalashnikov Concern on July 16, 2014. If a U.S. person has an inventory of Kalashnikov Concern products in which Kalashnikov Concern has an interest (for example, the products are not fully paid for or are being sold on consignment), we advise that U.S. person to contact OFAC for further guidance on handling of the inventory. [07-16-2014]



375. If I have Kalashnikov products in my inventory, can I sell them? 

If a U.S. person has an inventory of Kalashnikov Concern products in which Kalashnikov Concern has an interest (for example, the products are not fully paid for or are being sold on consignment), we advise that U.S. person to contact OFAC for further guidance on handling of the inventory. [07-16-2014]



391. Can U.S. persons issue and deal in new depositary receipts that are based on the equity of an entity subject to sanctions under one of the Directives?

In certain circumstances, yes. &nbsp;U.S. persons, including U.S. financial institutions, may issue and deal in depositary receipts that are based on equity issued by a person subject to Directive 1 prior to the date the person became subject to Directive 1. &nbsp;U.S. persons may not, however, deal in or issue depositary receipts that are based on equity issued by a person subject to Directive 1 on or after the sanctions effective date. &nbsp;Such transactions would constitute prohibited transactions or dealings in new equity under Directive 1. &nbsp;There are no equity-related prohibitions contained within Directives 2, 3, or 4, and thus U.S. persons are not prohibited from issuing or dealing in depositary receipts that are based on equity issued by persons subject only to those Directives. [11-28-2017]



392. How are banks expected to distinguish between transactions involving new versus old equity under Directive 1 if entities subject to Directive 1 issue new equity that utilizes the same International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) or other identifier as equity issued prior to the sanctions effective date? 

Directive 1 prohibits U.S. persons from transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new equity for named persons, their property, or their interests in property. Directive 1 also prohibits such transactions from occurring in the United States. If a U.S. person decides to transact or otherwise deal in equity issued by an SSI entity prior to the sanctions effective date, the U.S. person should ensure that it is not transacting in, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in the newly issued equity. To the extent that a U.S. person does in fact transact in, provide financing for, or otherwise deal in newly issued equity, such activity would constitute a violation of the prohibition set forth in Directive 1. [07-28-2014]



393. Does OFAC consider counterparty credit risk associated with derivatives transactions that are authorized pursuant to General License 1B to Executive Order 13662 to constitute new debt?

OFAC does not consider normal counterparty credit exposure encountered by a U.S. person to be an extension of credit when the U.S. person enters into an otherwise permissible derivatives transaction. &nbsp;U.S. persons engaging in such transactions should ensure that they do not hold, purchase, or sell the underlying asset in such transactions as described in Paragraph (b) of General License 1B. [11-28-2017]



394. If a U.S. person entered into a revolving credit facility or long-term loan arrangement for a person determined to be subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3 prior to the sanctions effective date, what are the restrictions on drawdowns from that facility? &nbsp;Do all drawdowns and disbursements pursuant to the parent agreement need to carry repayment terms of shorter than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive?
If a U.S. person entered into a long-term credit facility or loan agreement prior to the sanctions effective date, drawdowns and disbursements with repayment terms of shorter than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive are permitted. &nbsp;In addition, drawdowns and disbursements whose repayment terms exceed the applicable authorized tenor are not prohibited if the terms of such drawdowns and disbursements (including the length of the repayment period, the interest rate applied to the drawdown, and the maximum drawdown amount) were contractually agreed to prior to the sanctions effective date and are not modified on or after the sanctions effective date. &nbsp;U.S. persons may not deal in a drawdown or disbursement initiated after the sanctions effective date with a repayment term that is longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive if the terms of the drawdown or disbursement were negotiated on or after the sanctions effective date. &nbsp;Such a newly negotiated drawdown or disbursement would constitute a prohibited extension of credit. [11-28-2017]


395. Do Directives 1, 2, and 3 prohibit U.S. persons from dealing in or processing transactions under a letter of credit that was issued on or after the sanctions effective date and that carries a term of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive when the beneficiary or the issuing bank of that letter of credit is one of the entities identified as subject to the Directives?

U.S. persons may deal in (including act as the advising or confirming bank or as the applicant (i.e., the purchaser of the underlying goods or services)) or process transactions under a letter of credit in which an entity subject to Directive 1, 2, or 3 is the beneficiary (i.e., the exporter or seller of the underlying goods or services) because the subject letter of credit does not represent an extension of credit to the SSI entity. &nbsp;U.S. persons may deal in (including act as the advising or confirming bank or as the applicant or beneficiary) or process transactions under a letter of credit where the issuing bank is an SSI entity provided that the terms of all payment obligations under the letter of credit conform with the debt prohibitions under the applicable Directives. &nbsp;For example, a U.S. bank acting as the negotiating bank for a letter of credit issued after November 28, 2017 by an SSI entity subject to Directive 1 should ensure that it receives reimbursement from the SSI entity within the allowable 14-day debt limit.

U.S. persons may not deal in (including act as the advising or confirming bank or as the beneficiary) or process transactions under a letter of credit if all of the following three conditions are met: (1) the letter of credit was issued on or after the sanctions effective date, (2) the letter of credit carries a term of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive, and (3) an SSI entity is the applicant of the letter of credit. &nbsp;This would constitute prohibited activity because the subject letter of credit would represent an extension of credit to the SSI entity. [11-28-2017]



396. How do I know when a name has been added, changed, or removed on the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) List? 

The SSI List available on OFAC's website is the latest version of the list and contains the most updated information on entities determined to be subject to one or more of the Directives. OFAC also maintains &quot;changes files&quot; that record all significant changes to the SSI List. Any addition, alteration, or removal of an SSI record is considered a significant change and will appear in these files along with the date that such an action occurred. These files are offered in two formats and are called SSINEW14.PDF and SSINEW14.TXT. The changes files are produced by year, thus future file names will be SSINEW15.PDF and SSINEW15.TXT and so on. [09-12-2014]



404. Is the term &quot;new equity&quot; in Directive 1 limited to equity that is issued by an SSI entity after the sanctions effective date or would equity purchased or acquired by an SSI entity from a third party after the sanctions effective date be considered new equity? 

The equity prohibitions in Directive 1 pertain to equity issued directly or indirectly, by an SSI entity on or after the sanctions effective date. Directive 1 does not prohibit U.S. persons from dealing with an SSI entity as counterparty to transactions involving equity issued by a non-sanctioned party. [09-12-2014]



405. Does the prohibition on “otherwise dealing in new debt” of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive of SSI entities, their property, or their interests in property prohibit dealing in debt with maturity that exceeds the applicable authorized tenor in which the SSI entity is not directly or indirectly the borrower?

Directives 1, 2, and 3 only prohibit U.S. persons from dealing in new debt that is issued by a person subject to the relevant Directive (and only where the debt has a tenor that exceeds the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive). &nbsp;Directives 1, 2, and 3 do not prohibit U.S. persons from dealing with an SSI entity as counterparty to transactions involving debt issued on or after the sanctions effective date by a non-sanctioned party. &nbsp;[11-28-2017]



406. Does the prohibition on dealing in new equity of entities subject to Directive 1 apply to transactions in which those entities are not the issuer of the equity? 

U.S. persons are not prohibited from dealing in new equity with an entity subject to Directive 1 if the entity is not the issuer of the equity. For instance, U.S. persons are not prohibited from transacting with an entity subject to Directive 1 in support of new equity where the entity subject to Directive 1 is the underwriter of the equity and not the issuer. [08-27-2014]



407. May a U.S. person consent to a replacement of its participation by a non-U.S. person in a long-term loan facility that was extended to a person subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3 prior to the sanctions effective date? 

A U.S. person is not prohibited by Directives 1, 2, or 3 from engaging in transactions necessary to exit or replace its participation in a long-term loan facility that was extended to an SSI entity prior to the sanctions effective date. This would not constitute dealing in new debt. U.S. persons involved in such facilities should ensure that all newly negotiated drawdowns or disbursements from the facility utilize repayment terms that are not prohibited by the applicable sanctions effective date. See FAQ 394 for additional information on what constitutes a permitted drawdown or disbursement from an existing long-term loan obligation. [09-12-2014]



408. Is a U.S. person permitted under Directives 1, 2, or 3 to extend credit for longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive to a non-sanctioned party for the purpose of purchasing goods or services from a person subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3?

Directives 1, 2, and 3 do not prohibit U.S. persons from extending credit for longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive to non-sanctioned parties for the purpose of purchasing goods or services from an SSI entity, so long as the SSI entity is not the indirect borrower. [11-28-2017]



409. If a person determined to be subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3 is a borrower under a short-term facility created after the sanctions effective date, does the facility become prohibited if the SSI entity borrower makes successive short-term borrowings that cumulatively add up to more than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive (e.g., it borrows $100 million with a 10-day maturity, then at the end of the 10 days, the debt “rolls over”)?

Two conditions must be met for short-term facilities created after the sanctions effective date to be permissible. &nbsp;As long as (1) each individual disbursement has a maturity of no longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive and the disbursement&nbsp;is paid back in full&nbsp;before the next disbursement, and (2) the lender is not contractually required to roll over the balance for a cumulative period of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive at the borrower’s request (i.e., it has the option to refuse the request for a new short-term loan and terminate the facility), the loan is not prohibited, even though the same borrower may obtain a series of short-term loans from the same lender over a cumulative period exceeding the applicable tenor specified in the relevant directive. &nbsp;

U.S. persons may not deal in a drawdown or disbursement initiated after the sanctions effective date with a repayment term of longer than the applicable authorized tenor if the terms of the drawdown or disbursement are negotiated or re-negotiated on or after the sanctions effective date. &nbsp;Such a newly negotiated drawdown or disbursement would constitute a prohibited extension of credit. [11-28-2017]



410. Are U.S. persons prohibited from entering into new contracts after the sanctions effective date with persons subject to Directives 1, 2, or 3 that provide payment terms to the SSI entities of greater than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive? &nbsp;For instance, if a U.S. person agrees to sell shares or assets to an SSI entity in a corporate transaction that becomes effective on or after the sanctions effective date, is the U.S. person prohibited from agreeing to deferred purchase payments, even if no interest is involved, that may be paid more than the permissible number of days later by the SSI entity?

Directives 1, 2, and 3 prohibit new extensions of credit to SSI entities of greater than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive, and these prohibitions include deferred purchase agreements extending payment terms of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive to an SSI entity. &nbsp;Such agreements would constitute a prohibited extension of credit to an SSI entity if the terms were longer than the permissible number of days and the agreement was entered into on or after the sanctions effective date. &nbsp;OFAC does not consider the inclusion of an interest rate to be a necessary condition for establishing whether a transaction represents new debt. [11-28-2017]



411. What does the prohibition contained in Directive 3 under Executive Order 13662 mean? &nbsp;What is the scope of prohibited services?

OFAC issued Directive 3, introducing new prohibitions on all transactions in, provision of financing for, and other dealings in new debt of longer than 30 days maturity of persons determined to be subject to the Directive, their property, or their interests in property. &nbsp;Transactions by U.S. persons or within the United States involving derivative products whose value is linked to an underlying asset that constitutes new debt with maturity of longer than 30 days issued by a person subject to Directive 3 are authorized by General License 1B pursuant to Executive Order 13662. [11-28-2017]



412. What do the prohibitions contained in Directive 4 mean? What is the scope of prohibited services? 

Directive 4, as amended on October 31, 2017 in accordance with CAATSA, imposes two prohibitions on the provision, exportation, or reexportation of goods, services (except for financial services), or technology for certain activities involving persons subject to Directive 4, their property, or their interests in property, operating in the energy sector of the Russian Federation.

First, Directive 4 prohibits the direct or indirect provision, exportation, or reexportation of goods, services (except for financial services), or technology in support of exploration or production for deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale projects that have the potential to produce oil in the Russian Federation, or in maritime area claimed by the Russian Federation and extending from its territory, and that involve any person determined to be subject to Directive 4 or such person’s property or interests in property.

Second, pursuant to section 223(d) of Title II of CAATSA, Directive 4 further prohibits the direct or indirect provision, exportation, or reexportation of goods, services (except for financial services), or technology in support of exploration or production for deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale projects that meet all three of the following criteria: (1) the project was initiated on or after January 29, 2018; (2) the project has the potential to produce oil in any location; and (3) any person determined to be subject to Directive 4 or any earlier version thereof, including their property or interests in property, either has a 33 percent or greater ownership interest in the project or owns a majority of the voting interests in the project.

The prohibitions on the exportation of services include, for example, drilling services, geophysical services, geological services, logistical services, management services, modeling capabilities, and mapping technologies. The prohibitions do not apply to the provision of financial services, e.g., clearing transactions or providing insurance related to such activities.

When Directive 4 was implemented on September 12, 2014, OFAC contemporaneously issued General License 2, which authorized for 14 days all services and activities prohibited by Directive 4 that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreements involving persons determined to be subject to Directive 4. In order to qualify under this General License, a transaction must have (1) occurred prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on September 26, 2014, and (2) been related to operations, contracts, or agreements that were in effect prior to September 12, 2014. General License 2 did not authorize any new provision, exportation, or re-exportation of goods, services, or technology except as needed to cease operations, contracts, or other agreements involving affected projects.

See section 746.5 of the Export Administration Regulations (15 C.F.R. parts 730 through 774) for the Department of Commerce’s related license requirement on exports of certain goods for specified deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale projects. [10-31-2017]



413. For the purposes of Directive 4, how does OFAC define &quot;deepwater&quot; projects that have the potential to produce oil? 

A project is considered to be a deepwater project if the project involves underwater activities at depths of more than 500 feet. [09-12-2014]



414. Does Directive 4 apply to projects that have the potential to produce gas?

If a deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale project has the potential to produce oil, and the other requirements for either of the Directive 4 prohibitions are fully satisfied, then the relevant Directive 4 prohibition applies, irrespective of whether the project also has the potential to produce gas. If the project has the potential to produce gas only, then the Directive 4 prohibitions do not apply. [10-31-2017]



415. For persons determined to be subject to multiple Directives, how do the prohibitions and exemptions listed under one Directive affect prohibitions and exemptions under the other Directives?

Each Directive operates independently of the others. &nbsp;If a transaction involves a person subject to two Directives, for example, a U.S. person engaging in that transaction must comply with the requirements of both Directives. &nbsp;Exemptions in one Directive apply only to the prohibitions contained in that Directive and do not carry over to another Directive. &nbsp;For example, if a person is subject to both Directive 2 and Directive 4, the exemption for the provision of financial services by U.S. persons or in the United States under Directive 4 does not supersede the prohibition in Directive 2 on dealing in debt of longer than the applicable tenor specified in Directive 2 of such a person (the relevant tenor under Directive 2 varies depending upon when the debt was issued – see FAQ 370). &nbsp;[11-28-2017]



416. What does the &quot;sanctions effective date&quot; mean in the context of sectoral sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13662?

For purposes of the sectoral sanctions, &quot;sanctions effective date&quot; means the date a person is determined to be subject to the prohibition(s) of the relevant Directive. When a person has been previously determined to be subject to a Directive and the prohibitions in the Directive are subsequently amended, (1) the sanctions effective date for the prohibitions of the original Directive remains the date on which the person was identified as subject to the prohibitions of that Directive, and (2) the sanctions effective date for the prohibitions in the amended Directive is the date of the amendment (or other date specified in the amended Directive). [10-31-2017]



418. How does OFAC interpret the term &quot;shale projects&quot; with respect to the prohibitions in Directive 4 under Executive Order 13662? 

The term &quot;shale projects&quot; applies to projects that have the potential to produce oil from resources located in shale formations. Therefore, as long as the projects in question are neither deepwater nor Arctic offshore projects, the prohibitions in Directive 4 do not apply to exploration or production through shale to locate or extract crude oil (or gas) in reservoirs. [10-31-2017]



419. How should U.S. persons account for the debt prohibitions under Directives 1, 2, and 3 as they relate to payment terms for the following types of transactions: (1) the sale of goods to an SSI entity, (2) the provision of services to and subscription arrangements involving SSI entities, and (3) progress payments for long-term projects? 

U.S. persons may engage in commercial transactions with SSI entities provided that any such transactions do not represent a direct or indirect dealing in prohibited debt or equity. &nbsp;Because offering payment terms of longer than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive to an SSI entity generally constitutes a prohibited dealing in debt of the SSI entity, U.S. persons should ensure that payment terms conform with the applicable debt prohibitions.

For sales of goods to an SSI entity, U.S. persons may extend payment terms of up to the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive from the point at which title or ownership of the goods transfers to the SSI entity. &nbsp;For example, for a Directive 1 SSI entity, if the title or ownership of the goods transfers to the SSI entity on December 1, 2017, the U.S. person may give the SSI entity 14 days from December 1 to pay for those goods.&nbsp;

For the provision of services to, subscription arrangements involving, and progress payments for long-term projects involving SSI entities, U.S. persons may extend payment terms of up to the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive from the point at which a final invoice (or each final invoice) is issued. &nbsp;Payments made under these types of payment terms should utilize a value date of not later than the applicable tenor specified in the relevant Directive from either the point at which title or ownership has transferred (for payments relating to sales of goods) or the date of each final invoice (for payments relating to services, subscription arrangements, and progress payments).&nbsp; For example, if a U.S. person is providing services for a long-term project involving a Directive 2 SSI entity, and a final invoice is dated December 1, then the SSI entity must pay the invoice within 60 days of December 1 (i.e. the value date of the payment should be not later than 60 days from December 1).&nbsp;

In the event that a U.S. person believes that it may not receive payment in full by the end of the relevant payment period, the U.S. person should contact OFAC to determine whether a license or other authorization is required. [11-28-2017]



420. Under Directive 4, does the term &quot;production&quot; encompass activities such as transportation, refining, or other dealings in oil extracted from deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale projects?

For the purposes of Directive 4, the term &quot;production&quot; refers to the lifting of oil to the surface and the gathering, treating, field processing, and field storage of such oil. The production stage of a project ends when extracted oil is transported out of a field production storage tank or otherwise off of a field production site. Directive 4 does not prohibit the provision by U.S. persons or within the United States of goods, technology, or services to SSI entities when such transactions relate only to the transportation, refining, or other dealings involving oil that has already been extracted from a deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale project and transported out of a field production storage tank or otherwise off of a field production site. [12-11-2014]




421. How does OFAC interpret the term &quot;Arctic offshore projects&quot; with respect to the prohibitions in Directive 4 under Executive Order 13662? 

The term &quot;Arctic offshore projects&quot; applies to projects that have the potential to produce oil in areas that (1) involve drilling operations originating offshore, and (2) are located above the Arctic Circle. The prohibitions do not apply to horizontal drilling operations originating onshore where such drilling operations extend under the seabed to areas above the Arctic Circle. [10-31-2017]




536. For purposes of subsection 2 of Directive 4, what does it mean for a project to be “initiated”?

For purposes of subsection 2 of Directive 4, a project is “initiated” when a government or any of its political subdivisions, agencies, or instrumentalities (including any entity owned or controlled directly or indirectly by any of the foregoing) formally grants exploration, development, or production rights to any party.&nbsp; [10-31-2017]



537. Subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to certain projects in which a person subject to Directive 4 owns a 33 percent or more interest.&nbsp; Is OFAC changing its guidance on entities owned 50 percent or more by one or more entities subject to Directive 4?&nbsp; 

No.&nbsp; The prohibition in subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to any deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale project: (1) that is initiated on or after January 29, 2018; (2) that has the potential to produce oil; and (3) in which a person subject to Directive 4 (including its property or interests in property) either (a) owns a 33 percent or more interest, or (b) owns a majority of the voting interests.&nbsp; This prohibition applies to persons determined to be subject to Directive 4 as well as to entities owned 50 percent or more by one or more persons determined to be subject to Directive 4.&nbsp; The following examples illustrate the relationship between amended Directive 4 and OFAC’s 50 percent rule.

&nbsp;

Example 1:&nbsp; An SSI entity listed under Directive 4 (“Entity A”) has a 33 percent ownership interest in a deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale project initiated on or after January 29, 2018 that has the potential to produce oil (“Project X”).&nbsp; The prohibition of subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to Project X.&nbsp; Consequently, U.S. persons are prohibited from providing goods, services (except for financial services), or technology in support of exploration or production for Project X.&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Example 2:&nbsp; Instead of holding a direct interest in Project X, Entity A now owns 50 percent of Entity B, and Entity B holds a 33 percent interest in Project X.&nbsp; As a result of OFAC’s 50 percent rule, Entity B is subject to Directive 4.&nbsp; Because Entity B is subject to Directive 4 and owns a 33 percent or greater interest in Project X, the prohibition of subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to Project X.&nbsp; Consequently, U.S. persons are prohibited from providing goods, services (except for financial services), or technology in support of exploration or production for Project X.&nbsp;&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Example 3:&nbsp; Entity A now owns only 33 percent of Entity B, and Entity A is the only SSI entity that owns any interest in Entity B.&nbsp; Entity B holds a 100 percent ownership interest in Project X.&nbsp; Entity A owns less than 50 percent of Entity B, and so, in accordance with the 50 percent rule, Entity B is not subject to Directive 4.&nbsp; The prohibition of subsection 2 of Directive 4 would therefore not apply to Project X, even though Entity B owns an interest in the project that is 33 percent or greater. [10-31-2017]&nbsp;



538. Does OFAC aggregate ownership stakes of all entities subject to Directive 4 when determining whether a project is 33 percent or more owned by a person subject to Directive 4, or whether a person subject to Directive 4 owns a majority of the voting interests in a project?&nbsp; 

Yes.&nbsp; The prohibition of subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to projects owned 33 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more Directive 4 SSI entities, their property, and their interests in property, including entities owned 50 percent or more by one or more persons determined to be subject to Directive 4.&nbsp; The prohibition also applies to projects in which one or more Directive 4 SSI entities, their property, or their interests in property own an aggregated majority of the voting interests.&nbsp; Accordingly, if two SSI entities listed under Directive 4 each hold a 20 percent ownership interest in Project X, or together own a majority of the voting interests in the project, then the prohibition of subsection 2 of Directive 4 applies to Project X. [10-31-2017]



453. Pursuant to General License 6 under the Ukraine-Related Sanctions Program, are U.S. financial institutions authorized to process noncommercial, personal remittances to or from Crimea (or to or from individuals ordinarily resident in Crimea) when there is no individual who is a U.S. person as either the remitter or beneficiary in the transaction?

Yes. U.S. depository institutions, U.S.-registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S.-registered money transmitters are authorized to process noncommercial, personal remittances pursuant to General License 6 regardless of whether the originator or beneficiary is an individual who is a U.S. person. For example, General License 6 authorizes a U.S. depository institution to act as the intermediary financial institution and sole U.S. party in a payment representing a personal remittance originated by a non-U.S. person located outside of the United States for the benefit of an individual located in or ordinarily resident in Crimea. [05-07-2015]



454. Does General License No. 9 authorize U.S. persons to export or reexport services or software with knowledge or reason to know that such services or software are intended for an individual or entity identified on the Sectoral Sanctions Identification List (SSI List)?

General License No. 9 authorizes the exportation or reexportation, directly or indirectly, of certain services and software to persons in the Crimea region of Ukraine, including to individuals and entities identified on the SSI List or who are otherwise subject to directives under Executive Order 13662. However, General License No. 9 does not authorize the exportation or reexportation, directly or indirectly, of services or software with knowledge or reason to know that such services or software are intended for any person whose property and interests in property are blocked. Accordingly, U.S. persons engaging in transactions pursuant to General License No. 9 should conduct due diligence to ensure that such transactions do not involve individuals or entities identified on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons or whose property and interests in property are otherwise blocked. [05-21-2015]



539. Section 223(a) of CAATSA states that the “Secretary of the Treasury may determine that a person meets one or more of the criteria in section 1(a) of Executive Order No. 13662 if that person is a state-owned entity operating in the railway or metals and mining sector of the economy of the Russian Federation.” Is OFAC going to impose sanctions on persons operating in those sectors?

Section 223(a) of CAATSA does not require the imposition of sanctions. While sanctions may be imposed on potential targets in any sector of the economy of the Russian Federation in the future, maintaining unity with partners on sanctions implemented with respect to the Russian Federation is important to the U.S. government. The point of the sectoral sanctions is to impose costs on the Russian Federation for its aggression in Ukraine. The United States will continue to work closely with our allies to address unintended consequences arising as a result of such sanctions. [10-31-2017]



540. How will OFAC interpret the following terms as used in section 233 of CAATSA: “investment,” “facilitates,” “unjustly benefits,” and “close associates or family members?”

For purposes of implementing section 233 of CAATSA, OFAC anticipates interpreting these key terms as follows:

“investment” – For purposes of implementing section 233 of CAATSA, OFAC will interpret the term “investment” broadly as a transaction that constitutes a commitment or contribution of funds or other assets or a loan or other extension of credit to an enterprise. For purposes of this interpretation, a loan or extension of credit is any transfer or extension of funds or credit on the basis of an obligation to repay, or any assumption or guarantee of the obligation of another to repay an extension of funds or credit, including: overdrafts, currency swaps, purchases of debt securities issued by the Government of Russia, purchases of a loan made by another person, sales of financial assets subject to an agreement to repurchase, renewals or refinancings whereby funds or credits are transferred or extended to a borrower or recipient described in the provision, the issuance of standby letters of credit, and drawdowns on existing lines of credit.

“facilitates” – For purposes of implementing section 233 of CAATSA, OFAC will interpret “facilitates” to mean the provision of assistance for certain efforts, activities, or transactions, including the provision of currency, financial instruments, securities, or any other transmission of value; purchasing, selling, transporting, swapping, brokering, financing, approving, or guaranteeing; the provision of other services of any kind; the provision of personnel; or the provision of software, technology, or goods of any kind.

“unjustly benefits” – For purposes of implementing section 233 of CAATSA, OFAC will interpret the term “unjustly benefits” broadly to refer to activities such as public corruption that result in any direct or indirect advantage, value, or gain, whether the benefit is tangible or intangible, by officials of the Government of the Russian Federation, or their close associates or family members. Such public corruption could include, among other things, the misuse of Russian public assets or the misuse of public authority.

“close associates or family members” – For purposes of implementing section 233 of CAATSA, OFAC will interpret the term “close associate” of an official of the Government of the Russian Federation as a person who is widely or publicly known, or is actually known by the relevant person engaging in the conduct in question, to maintain a close relationship with that official. OFAC will interpret the term “family member” of an official of the Government of the Russian Federation to include parents, spouses (current and former), extramarital partners, children, siblings, uncles, aunts, grandparents, grandchildren, first cousins, stepchildren, stepsiblings, parents-in-law, and spouses of any of the foregoing. [10-31-2017]



567. I am a U.S. person employee or work at an office of a company that was designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked by operation of law pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation.&nbsp; What am I authorized to do with respect to continuing activities of the blocked entity?

In issuing General License 12A, OFAC is authorizing a time-limited maintenance or wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreements that were in effect prior to April 6, 2018 and in which the blocked entities listed in General License 12A have an interest, provided that any payment made directly or indirectly to the blocked entities listed in General License 12A be deposited in a blocked account at a U.S. financial institution.&nbsp;

In general, General License 12A would authorize all transactions ordinarily incident to the continuity of operations or to facilitate a wind down, including the provision of salary payments, pension payments, or other benefits, by the blocked entities listed in General License 12A, or the provision of services by the employee to such blocked entities, until the expiry of General License 12A.

U.S. person employees are encouraged to review the applicable OFAC regulations, authorizations, and public guidance.&nbsp; If, after conducting that review, you are concerned that your activities as an employee are not authorized by general license, you may contact OFAC.&nbsp;

If you are a U.S. person employee of an individual or entity that is not among the blocked entities listed in General License 12A, including entities blocked pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule, you are prohibited from engaging in transactions with such individual or entity, including the provision or receipt of goods or services, or otherwise transacting or dealing in any property in which the individual or entity has an interest.&nbsp; If you wish to seek authorization to maintain or wind down operations, contracts, or other agreements with such individual or entity, contact OFAC.

[04-23-2018]



568. I am a U.S. person, and I am also an employee, or sit on the board, of an entity that was either designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked by operation of law pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation.&nbsp; Can I continue to be employed by or sit on the board of a blocked entity? What am I allowed to do with respect to severing ties with the entity?

Absent authorization from OFAC, your continued employment or board membership with such an entity is prohibited.&nbsp; You should review the actions you view as necessary to sever your ties with the blocked entity against applicable OFAC regulations, authorizations, and public guidance.&nbsp; If, after conducting that review, you decide that any of the contemplated activities necessary to sever the relationship are prohibited, you should apply for a specific license.&nbsp; If you are unsure about whether authorization is required, contact OFAC. &nbsp;[04-06-2018]



569. A U.S. company had ordered goods from an entity that was designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on&nbsp;April&nbsp;6, 2018&nbsp;as a result of such a designation.&nbsp; May the U.S. company still accept the goods?

Yes, provided that the importation is in accordance with the requirements and limitations specified in General License 12A .&nbsp; For the limited period of time specified in the general license, General License 12A authorizes all transactions ordinarily incident and necessary to the maintenance or wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreement, which includes authorization for U.S. persons to import goods into the United States from the blocked entities listed in General License 12A, provided that any outstanding payment for the goods be deposited in a blocked account at a U.S. financial institution. [04-23-2018]



570. &nbsp;I own shares in or global depositary receipts (GDRs) related to shares in an entity that was designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation.&nbsp; What action am I allowed to take with respect to those shares or GDRs?

For the limited period of time specified in the general license, General License 13O authorizes certain divestment and transfer activities related to debt, equity, or other holdings in GAZ Group, or in entities in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, that were issued by GAZ Auto Plant (“Other Issuer Holdings”), subject to certain conditions and exceptions. Specifically, General License 13O authorizes U.S. persons to divest or transfer to a non-U.S. person, or to facilitate the transfer by a non-U.S. person to another non-U.S. person, debt, equity, or other holdings in GAZ Group or Other Issuer Holdings as described in General License 13O. However, such divestment, transfer, or facilitation must not result in U.S. persons selling debt, equity, or other holdings to; purchasing or investing in debt, equity, or other holdings in; or facilitating such transactions with, directly or indirectly, any blocked person, including GAZ Group, other than transactions and activities involving GAZ Group, or entities in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the divestment or transfer of debt, equity, or other holdings in the entities identified in General License 13O. See General License 13O for further details. Note that General License 13O does not authorize the same activities with respect to certain additional entities other than GAZ Group that were authorized under past general licenses.

General License 13O superseded General License 13N on July 16, 2020. [07-22-2020]



571.&nbsp; I am a U.S. person holding accounts for or other property of an entity or individual that was designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation.&nbsp; Does General License 13O allow me to unblock this property?&nbsp; &nbsp;

No.&nbsp; For the limited period of time specified in the general license, General License 13O authorizes certain divestment and transfer activities related to debt, equity, or other holdings in GAZ Group, or in entities in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, that were issued by GAZ Auto Plant (“Other Issuer Holdings”), subject to certain conditions and exceptions.&nbsp; It does not authorize U.S. persons to sell debt, equity, or other holdings to; to purchase or invest in debt, equity, or other holdings in; or to facilitate such transactions with, directly or indirectly, GAZ Group or any other blocked person, other than transactions and activities involving GAZ Group, or entities in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the divestment or transfer of debt, equity, or other holdings in these entities.&nbsp;&nbsp;Note that General License 13O does not authorize the same activities with respect to certain additional entities other than GAZ Group that were authorized under past general licenses.

General License 13O superseded General License 13N on July 16, 2020. [07-22-2020]



572. Prior to April 6, 2018, E.O. 13662 only applied to OFAC’s Ukraine-/Russia-related sectoral sanctions and identifications under the Sectoral Sanctions Identification List.&nbsp; Why is OFAC designating individuals and entities under E.O. 13662?

Although E.O. 13662 provides OFAC the authority to impose sectoral sanctions on specified persons operating in sectors of the Russian economy as implemented through Directives 1-4, OFAC may also designate persons as blocked under E.O. 13662.&nbsp; Unlike with SSI entities, U.S. persons must block the property and interests in property of any person designated as blocked pursuant to E.O. 13662.&nbsp; Persons designated as blocked under E.O. 13662 are added to the SDN List.&nbsp; SSI entities on the SSI List are identified with the descriptive text “Executive Order 13662 Directive Determination,” followed by the applicable Directive.&nbsp; [04-06-2018]



573. A person designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked by operation of law pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation holds an ownership interest of less than fifty percent in a U.S. company.&nbsp; In such a scenario, how does the U.S. company comply with U.S. sanctions? 

If one or more blocked persons in such a scenario does not hold a 50 percent or more interest in the U.S. company, the U.S. company is not itself blocked, but the U.S. company must block all property and interests in property in which the blocked person has an interest.&nbsp; See OFAC’s 50 percent rule guidance.&nbsp; Depending on the nature of the property blocked by the U.S. company, the U.S. company may be able to continue operating, but any payments, dividends, or disbursement of profits to the blocked person would be prohibited and, to the extent such payments are required, must be placed in a blocked account at a U.S. financial institution.&nbsp; If a U.S. company is in such a scenario, the U.S. company is encouraged to contact OFAC to determine whether a license or other authorization is required.&nbsp;

[04-06-2018]



574. Will foreign persons be subject to sanctions for doing business with the individuals or entities designated under E.O. 13661 or E.O. 13662, or blocked pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule on April 6, 2018 as a result of such a designation?

Section 228 of CAATSA amends SSIDES by inserting a mandatory sanctions provision on foreign persons that Treasury determines, inter alia, knowingly facilitate significant transactions, including deceptive or structured transactions, for or on behalf of any person subject to U.S. sanctions with respect to the Russian Federation, or their child, spouse, parent, or sibling.&nbsp; Additionally, section 226 of CAATSA amends UFSA by making the sanctions in that section mandatory.&nbsp; Under the amended section 5 of UFSA, foreign financial institutions face correspondent account or payable through account sanctions if the Secretary of the Treasury determines, inter alia, that they knowingly facilitate significant financial transactions on behalf of any Russian person added to OFAC’s SDN List pursuant to UFSA, E.O. 13660, E.O. 13661, E.O. 13662, E.O. 13685, or any other E.O. addressing the crisis in Ukraine.

As described in FAQs 542 and 545, a transaction is not “significant” if U.S. persons would not require specific licenses from OFAC to participate in it.&nbsp; Therefore, activity authorized by Ukraine-/Russia-related General Licenses 12A and 13, and occurring within the time period authorized in these general licenses, would not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by CAATSA, and section 5 of UFSA, as amended by CAATSA.&nbsp; Nothing in the general licenses should be construed as authorizing deceptive or structured transactions.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

The intent of the designations on April 6, 2018 is to impose costs on Russia for its malign behavior.&nbsp; The United States remains committed to coordinating with our allies and partners in order to mitigate adverse and unintended consequences of these designations.&nbsp;&nbsp;[04-23-2018]



575. Why is OFAC issuing General License 14, and what new activity does it authorize?

The purpose of General License 14 is to allow United Company RUSAL PLC (RUSAL) or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, to continue maintenance or wind down activities until October 23, 2018. Although all funds blocked prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, April 23, 2018 remain blocked, the general license authorizes the use of these blocked funds for the maintenance and wind down activities described in General License 14. In addition, U.S. persons are not required to block transactions authorized by General License 14 that occur on or after April 23, 2018, except for transactions involving blocked persons other than RUSAL or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest. For a discussion of the relationship between General License 14 and foreign persons, please see FAQs 579 and 580.

[04-23-2018]



576. Under what circumstances can OFAC give further sanctions relief to RUSAL or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?

Consistent with OFAC regulations, parties may be removed by demonstrating a change in the circumstances that led to their designation.&nbsp;&nbsp;In the case of RUSAL, absent other adverse information and consistent with the facts and circumstances of any petition for delisting, the path for the United States to provide sanctions relief is through divestment and relinquishment of control of RUSAL by any Specially Designated Nationals, including Oleg Deripaska. [05-22-2018]



577. I am a U.S. person holding accounts for or other property of RUSAL or another entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest. Does General License 14 allow me to unblock this property?

No. All accounts or other property of RUSAL or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest blocked as of April 23, 2018 remain blocked, except for the use in maintenance and wind-down activities described in General License 14. U.S. persons, however, may engage in transactions authorized by General License 14 that occur on or after April 23, 2018 without blocking payments associated with such transactions, except for transactions involving blocked persons other than RUSAL (including any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest). [04-23-2018]



578. How&nbsp;did General License 12A differ from General License 12?

General License 12A&nbsp;was amended to reflect the authorization in General License 14. Specifically, U.S. persons were no longer required to place into a blocked account payments to or for RUSAL, or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, for activities authorized by General License 14.&nbsp; Activities necessary to the maintenance or wind down of operations or existing contracts of RUSAL and any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, are authorized pursuant to General License 14 through October 23, 2018.&nbsp; On May 1, 2018, OFAC issued amended General License 12B.&nbsp;See FAQ 583.&nbsp; OFAC issued amended General License 12C on May 22, 2018&nbsp;to make conforming edits in light of the issuance of General License 15.&nbsp; [05-22-2018]



579. Will foreign persons be subject to sanctions under CAATSA for engaging in activity with RUSAL or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?

As described in FAQs 542, 545, and 574, a transaction will not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, and section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA, if U.S. persons would not require specific licenses from OFAC to participate in such a transaction. Therefore, activity authorized by General License 14, and occurring within the time period authorized by General License 14, would not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by CAATSA. [04-23-2018]



580. I am a foreign person that seeks to pay RUSAL or another entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest for goods or services connected with maintenance or wind-down activities authorized by General License 14. Am I required to deposit payment into a blocked account at a U.S. financial institution in order for my payment to not be considered “significant” for purposes of section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA? 

No. U.S. persons may engage in activities authorized by General License 14 that occur on or after April 23, 2018, except for activities involving blocked persons other than RUSAL (or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest) without making associated payments into a blocked account. Similarly, foreign persons may engage in activities that would be authorized by General License 14 if engaged in by a U.S. person without making associated payments into a blocked account. [04-23-2018]



581. I am a U.S. person that seeks to supply goods to RUSAL. Am I permitted to export those goods from the United States to RUSAL pursuant to General License 14?

Yes. General License 14 does not restrict exports to RUSAL (or any other entity in which RUSAL owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest), provided that the activity is for maintenance or wind down and consistent with the requirements of other federal agencies. [04-23-2018]



582.&nbsp;I am located outside of the United States and seek to export goods from a third-country location in connection with activity for the maintenance or wind down of contracts or agreements with an entity listed on General License 12B (or any other entity in which a listed entity in 12B owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest). Are&nbsp;such exports excluded from the authorization in&nbsp;General License 12B or otherwise subject to section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA?&nbsp;

No. Although General License 12B? does not authorize the exportation of goods from the United States, paragraph (d)(4) of General License 12B does not similarly apply to the exportation of goods from a third country to another location. [05-01-2018]



583.&nbsp;Why is OFAC issuing General License 12B, and what new activity does it authorize?&nbsp;

OFAC issued&nbsp;General License 12B&nbsp;to address difficulties blocked U.S. persons are having accessing funds needed for authorized wind-down and maintenance activities.&nbsp; General License 12B explicitly permits originating and intermediary U.S. financial institutions to process funds transfers that they would otherwise block to an account held by a blocked U.S. person at a U.S. financial institution.&nbsp; In addition, General License 12B clarifies that U.S. financial institutions can release such funds for authorized maintenance and wind-down purposes only.&nbsp; On May 22, 2018, OFAC issued amended General License 12C to make conforming edits in light of the issuance of General License 15. [05-22-2018]



585.&nbsp;May U.S. persons do business with a foreign company in which blocked persons hold, individually or in the aggregate, a less than 50 percent interest?&nbsp; Are foreign persons, including foreign financial institutions, subject to sanctions under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, and section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA, for doing business with a foreign company in which blocked persons hold, individually or in the aggregate, a less than 50 percent interest?&nbsp;

If one or more blocked persons does not hold, individually or in the aggregate, a 50 percent or greater interest in a foreign company, the foreign company is not itself blocked by virtue of OFAC’s 50 percent rule, and U.S. persons generally are not prohibited from engaging in transactions with the foreign company unless otherwise prohibited (for example, a transaction with the foreign company that specifically involves a blocked person).&nbsp; Likewise, as described in FAQs 542 and 545, if foreign persons, including foreign financial institutions, are engaging in transactions with such a foreign company, such transactions would not be considered “significant?” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by CAATSA.&nbsp; The foregoing does not apply if the ownership in the foreign company by one or more blocked persons, individually or in the aggregate, rises to or&nbsp;above 50 percent.&nbsp;[05-01-2018]



586.&nbsp;Why is OFAC issuing General License 15I, and what new activity does it authorize?

The purpose of General License 15I is to allow GAZ Group and any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, to engage in certain activities until January 22, 2021.

General License 15I authorizes certain activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the manufacture and sale of existing and new models of vehicles, components, and spare parts, including automobiles, light commercial vehicles, trucks, buses, and engines/powertrains, produced by GAZ Group, or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, including:&nbsp;research, design, development, production, modification, upgrade, certification, distribution, and marketing; provision or receipt of services, including warranty, maintenance, logistics, storage, shipping, insurance, security, brokerage, legal, banking and financial (including financing and renegotiation of debt), technical and engineering, advertising, and customer services; entry into joint ventures, contract manufacturing agreements, supplier contracts, and other new contracts; payment and receipt of dividends and other funds owed by or to GAZ Group; the conduct of financial transactions; and activities necessary for compliance with reporting and certification requirements of General License 15I, including financial auditing services.&nbsp;

In addition, General License 15I authorizes certain transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the maintenance or wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreements involving GAZ Group, or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, and that were in effect prior to April 6, 2018, including the importation of goods, services, or technology into the United States.&nbsp; See FAQ 625 for what types of activities are considered to be maintenance under General License 15I.&nbsp; The authorizations in GL 15I, however, exclude the involvement of any blocked person other than GAZ Group, or any &nbsp;entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp;

Although all funds blocked prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 22, 2018 remain blocked, the general license authorizes the use of these blocked funds for the activities authorized in General License 15I. &nbsp;In addition, U.S. persons have not been required to block transactions authorized by General License 15I or its predecessors that occurred on or after May 22, 2018; however, transactions involving blocked persons other than GAZ Group or any &nbsp;entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, must be blocked. &nbsp;For information regarding the relationship between General License 15I and foreign persons, please see FAQs 589 and 590.

In addition to authorizing the activities specified above, General License 15I establishes certain reporting and certification requirements for GAZ Group, including monthly certification to OFAC that GAZ Group is not acting for or on behalf of Oleg Deripaska or any other person included on OFAC’s list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons. [07-22-2020]



587.&nbsp;Under what circumstances can OFAC give further sanctions relief to GAZ Group or any other entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?&nbsp;

Consistent with OFAC regulations, parties may be removed by demonstrating a change in the circumstances that led to their designation. In the case of GAZ Group, absent other adverse information and consistent with the facts and circumstances of any petition for delisting, the path for the United States to provide sanctions relief is through divestment and relinquishment of control of GAZ Group by any Specially Designated Nationals, including Oleg Deripaska. [05-22-2018]



588.&nbsp;I am a U.S. person holding accounts for or other property of GAZ Group or another entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest. Does General License 15I allow me to unblock this property?

No. &nbsp;All accounts or other property of GAZ Group or any &nbsp;entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest blocked as of May 22, 2018, remain blocked, except for the use in the activities authorized in General License 15I. &nbsp;U.S. persons, however, have been permitted to engage in transactions authorized by General License 15I or its predecessors that occurred on or after May 22, 2018, without blocking payments associated with such transactions; however, transactions involving blocked persons other than GAZ Group (including any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest) must be blocked. [07-22-2020]



589.&nbsp;Will foreign persons be subject to sanctions under CAATSA for engaging in activity with GAZ Group or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?

As described in FAQs 542, 545, 574, and 579, a transaction will not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, and section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA, if a U.S. person would not require a specific license from OFAC to participate in such a transaction. &nbsp;Therefore, activity authorized by General License 15I, and occurring within the time period authorized by General License 15I, would not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by CAATSA. [07-22-2020]



590.&nbsp;I am a foreign person that seeks to pay GAZ Group or another entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest for goods or services connected with activities authorized by General License 15I. Am I required to deposit payment into a blocked account at a U.S. financial institution in order for my payment to not be considered “significant” for purposes of section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA?

No. U.S. persons may engage in activities authorized by General License 15I that occur on or after May 22, 2018, except for activities involving blocked persons other than GAZ Group (or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest) without making associated payments into a blocked account. Similarly, foreign persons may engage in activities that would be authorized by General License 15I if engaged in by a U.S. person without making associated payments into a blocked account. [07-22-2020]



591.&nbsp;I am a U.S. person that seeks to supply goods to GAZ Group. Am I permitted to export those goods from the United States to GAZ Group pursuant to General License 15I?&nbsp;

Yes. General License 15I does not restrict exports to GAZ Group (or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest), provided that the export is ordinarily incident and necessary to activities authorized by General License 15I. Exports to GAZ Group must also be consistent with the requirements of other federal agencies. [07-22-2020]



592.&nbsp;Does General License 15I authorize U.S. persons to receive regularly scheduled payments of principal and interest from GAZ Group (or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest)? Does General License 15I authorize U.S. persons to receive accelerated payments or voluntary prepayment pursuant to the terms of such loan or bond?&nbsp;

Yes, General License 15I authorizes U.S. persons to receive regularly scheduled payments of principal and interest from GAZ Group (or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest) to the extent such transactions are consistent with the activities authorized in General License 15I and provided the other terms and conditions of General License 15I are met. As a general matter, General License 15I also would authorize U.S. persons to receive accelerated payments or voluntary prepayments from GAZ Group (or any entity in which GAZ Group owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest) so long as such accelerated payments or voluntary prepayments are consistent with the activities authorized by General License 15I. If you are unsure about whether General License 15I authorizes such accelerated payments or voluntary prepayments, you may contact OFAC. [07-22-2020]



593.&nbsp;If a blocked person holds an equity interest in a foreign entity, and the foreign entity is not itself a blocked person pursuant to OFAC’s fifty percent rule, can the foreign entity be sanctioned under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by section 228 of CAATSA, and section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA, for paying dividends to the blocked person?&nbsp;

Whether paying dividends to a blocked person who holds an equity interest in the foreign company of less than fifty percent, individually or in the aggregate, would result in OFAC imposing sanctions under these authorities on the payer of the dividends depends on whether OFAC determines that such a transaction is “significant.” For information on how OFAC determines whether a transaction is significant, see FAQs 542, 545, 579, and 589. Paying dividends into a blocked account or in a manner that does not provide economic benefit, directly or indirectly, to the blocked person, such as an escrow account, will not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a sanctions determination under section 10 of SSIDES, as amended by CAATSA, or section 5 of UFSA, as amended by CAATSA. [05-25-2018]



625. What types of activities are considered “maintenance” as the term is used in General License 15I? 

As a general matter, the authorization for “maintenance” in General License 15I includes all transactions ordinarily incident to the continuity of operations. Additionally, for the purposes of General License 15I, the authorization for “maintenance” generally includes all transactions and activities ordinarily incident to performing under a contract or agreement in effect prior to April 6, 2018, provided that the level of performance is consistent with the terms of the general license and consistent with past practices that existed between the party and the blocked entity prior to April 6, 2018. Notwithstanding the absence of a contract or agreement in effect prior to April 6, 2018, the authorization for “maintenance” also generally includes all transactions and activities ordinarily incident to obtaining goods or services from or providing goods or services to a blocked entity listed in General License 15I in a manner consistent with the terms of the general license and consistent with past practices that existed between the party and the blocked entity prior to April 6, 2018. OFAC will consider the transaction history between the party, or any intermediary party, and the blocked entity prior to April 6, 2018 in assessing whether activity is consistent with past practices. The authorization for “maintenance” also generally includes authorization to enter into contingent contracts for transactions and activities consistent with the above, extending beyond the current expiration of General Licenses 15I, where any performance after the expiration of the general license is contingent on such performance either not being prohibited or being authorized by OFAC.

For example, maintenance transactions and activities authorized by General License 15I could include issuing or accepting purchase orders and making or receiving shipments consistent with the terms of the general license that were initiated after April 6, 2018 involving the blocked entities if such activity is ordinarily incident and necessary to contracts in effect prior to April 6, 2018 (provided the purchase and shipment amounts are consistent with past practices, as demonstrated by transaction history). Similarly, transactions and activities that are not within the framework of a preexisting agreement may be considered “maintenance” if such activity is consistent with the transaction history between the person and the blocked entity prior to April 6, 2018. Conversely, General License 15I would not authorize as maintenance transactions purchase orders and shipments involving the blocked entities listed in those general licenses where there was no preexisting relationship between a person and a blocked entity or where the contemplated activity exceeds past practices that existed between the party and the blocked entity prior to April 6, 2018 as demonstrated by transaction history. Stockpiling inventory, for example, would not be authorized as maintenance unless transaction history indicates that the scope and extent of maintaining inventory is consistent with past practice.

In addition, General License 15I authorizes certain activities beyond maintenance. See FAQ 586.

Note that past general licenses, such as General License 14 and General License 16, also authorized maintenance with respect to certain entities, but have since expired. [07-22-2020]


&nbsp;


Section 226 - Imposition of Sanctions with Respect to Foreign Financial Institutions (FFIs)


541. What activities can trigger sanctions on a foreign financial institution (FFI) under section 226 of CAATSA?

&nbsp;

Section 226 of CAATSA amends section 5 of the Ukraine Freedom Support Act (UFSA) by making the sanctions in that section, which previously were discretionary, mandatory. Under the amended section, FFIs face sanctions if the Secretary of the Treasury determines that they knowingly engage in significant transactions involving certain defense- and energy-related activities or knowingly facilitate significant financial transactions on behalf of any Russian person added to OFAC’s SDN List pursuant to UFSA, Executive Order (E.O.) 13660, E.O. 13661, E.O. 13662, or E.O. 13685, or any other E.O. addressing the crisis in Ukraine. FFIs will not be subject to sanctions under this amended section solely on the basis of knowingly facilitating significant financial transactions on behalf of persons listed on OFAC’s Sectoral Sanctions Identification List pursuant to Directives 1-4 of E.O. 13662.&nbsp;

Unless the Secretary of State makes a determination that it is not in the national interest of the United States to do so, the Secretary of the Treasury shall prohibit the opening and prohibit or impose strict conditions on the maintaining in the United States of correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts for any FFI that the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, determines has engaged in sanctionable activity. [10-31-2017] &nbsp;


542. How does OFAC interpret the following terms as used in section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA: “significant transaction,” “significant financial transaction,” and “facilitated?” 

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will generally reflect the following:

“significant transaction” and “significant financial transaction” – For purposes of implementing section 5 of UFSA, as amended by section 226 of CAATSA, OFAC will consider the totality of the facts and circumstances when determining whether transactions or financial transactions are “significant.” OFAC will consider the following list of seven broad factors that can assist in the determination of whether a transaction is “significant”: (1) the size, number, and frequency of the transaction(s); (2) the nature of the transaction(s); (3) the level of awareness of management and whether the transaction(s) are part of a pattern of conduct; (4) the nexus between the transaction(s) and a blocked person; (5) the impact of the transaction(s) on statutory objectives; (6) whether the transaction(s) involve deceptive practices; and (7) such other factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant on a case-by-case basis. For purposes of section 5 of UFSA, a transaction is not significant if U.S. persons would not require specific licenses from OFAC to participate in it.

OFAC will generally interpret the term “financial transaction” broadly to encompass any transfer of value involving a financial institution. For example, the following is a non-exhaustive list of activities that OFAC would consider to be a “financial transaction”:
• The receipt or origination of wire transfers;
• The acceptance of commercial paper (both retail and wholesale), and the clearance of such paper (including checks and similar drafts);
• The receipt or origination of ACH or ATM transactions;
• The holding of nostro, vostro, or loro accounts;
• The provision of trade finance or letter of credit services;
• The provision of guarantees or similar instruments;
• The provision of investment products or instruments or participation in investments; and
• Any other transactions for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, a person serving as a correspondent, respondent, or beneficiary.

“facilitated” – For purposes of implementing section 5 of UFSA, OFAC will generally interpret the term “facilitated” broadly. “Facilitated” refers to the provision of assistance for certain efforts, activities, or transactions, including the provision of currency, financial instruments, securities, or any other transmission of value; purchasing; selling; transporting; swapping; brokering; financing; approving; guaranteeing; the provision of other services of any kind; the provision of personnel; or the provision of software, technology, or goods of any kind. [04-06-2018]


543. How will U.S. financial institutions and FFIs know that the Department of the Treasury has imposed prohibitions or strict conditions on FFIs’ correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States pursuant to section 5 of UFSA?&nbsp;

&nbsp;

If, pursuant to Section 5 of UFSA, Treasury decides to impose strict condition(s) on maintaining U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts for an FFI, or decides to prohibit the opening or maintaining of U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts for an FFI, Treasury will add the name of the FFI to a list similar to the List of Foreign Financial Institutions Subject to Part 561 (the “Part 561 List”). Treasury will establish and publicize that list before adding any FFIs to it. The list will be included in the Consolidated Sanctions List Data Files, and will be available for download in all Consolidated Sanctions List data file formats. [10-31-2017]


Section 228 - Mandatory Imposition of Sanctions With Respect to Certain Transactions with Foreign Sanctions Evaders and Serious Human Rights Abusers in the Russian Federation


544. What is the relationship between CAATSA and the Support for the Sovereignty, Integrity, Democracy, and Economic Stability of Ukraine Act of 2014 (SSIDES)?

&nbsp;

Section 228 of CAATSA adds two sections to SSIDES that impose mandatory sanctions. [10-31-2017]&nbsp;


545. What do the following key terms in Section 10 of SSIDES mean: “foreign person,” “knowingly,” “materially violate,” “facilitates . . . for or on behalf of,” “significant transaction,” and “deceptive or structured transaction”? 

We anticipate that regulations to be promulgated will generally reflect the following:

“foreign person” – As indicated in section 10(f)(2) of SSIDES, which was added pursuant to CAATSA, the phrase “foreign person” is defined in 31 C.F.R. § 595.304 as in effect on August 2, 2017.

“knowingly” – For purposes of section 10(a) of SSIDES, OFAC will interpret this term consistent with its usage in section 221 of CAATSA, which provides the following: “The term ‘knowingly’, with respect to conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the circumstance, or the result.”

“materially violate” – For purposes of section 10(a)(1) of SSIDES, OFAC will interpret the term “materially violate” to refer to an “egregious” violation. A determination about whether a violation is egregious will be based on an analysis of the applicable General Factors as described in OFAC’s Economic Sanctions Enforcement Guidelines, located in subsection (B)(1), section V of Appendix A to 31 C.F.R. part 501.

“facilitation . . . for or on behalf of” – For purposes of section 10(a)(2) of SSIDES, facilitating a significant transaction for or on behalf of a person will be interpreted to mean providing assistance for a transaction from which the person in question derives a particular benefit of any kind (as opposed to a generalized benefit conferred upon undifferentiated persons in aggregate). Assistance may include the provision or transmission of currency, financial instruments, securities, or any other value; purchasing, selling, transporting, swapping, brokering, financing, approving, or guaranteeing; the provision of other services of any kind; the provision of personnel; or the provision of software, technology, or goods of any kind.

“significant transaction” – For purposes of section 10(a)(2) of SSIDES, OFAC will consider the totality of the facts and circumstances when determining whether transactions are “significant.” OFAC will consider the following list of seven broad factors that can assist in the determination of whether a transaction is “significant”: (1) the size, number, and frequency of the transaction(s); (2) the nature of the transaction(s); (3) the level of awareness of management and whether the transaction(s) are part of a pattern of conduct; (4) the nexus between the transaction(s) and a person subject to sanctions imposed by the United States with respect to the Russian Federation; (5) the impact of the transaction(s) on statutory objectives; (6) whether the transaction(s) involve deceptive practices; and (7) such other factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant on a case-by-case basis.

Furthermore, for purposes of section 10(a)(2) of SSIDES, a transaction is not significant if U.S. persons would not require specific licenses from OFAC to participate in it. A transaction in which the person(s) subject to sanctions is only identified on the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) List or the Non-SDN Menu-Based Sanctions (NS-MBS) List must also involve deceptive practices (i.e., attempts to obscure or conceal the actual parties or true nature of the transaction(s), or to evade sanctions) to potentially be considered significant. A transaction involving an SSI entity or NS-MBS person is not, however, automatically significant simply because a U.S. person would require a specific license from OFAC to participate in it and it involves deceptive practices. In all cases, the totality of the circumstances, including the other factors listed above, will shape the final determination of significance.

“deceptive or structured transaction” – As indicated in section 10(f)(3) of SSIDES as added by CAATSA, the term “structured,” with respect to a transaction, has the meaning given the term ‘structure’ in 31 C.F.R. § 1010.100(xx). Structured transactions are a type of deceptive transaction. A “deceptive transaction” is one that involves deceptive practices. As described in 31 C.F.R. § 561.404(f), “deceptive practices” are attempts to obscure or conceal the actual parties or true nature of a transaction, or to evade sanctions. [01-05-2021]


546. In section 10(a)(2)(A) of SSIDES, are persons “subject to sanctions imposed by the United States with respect to the Russian Federation” limited to persons listed on OFAC’s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN) List, or does it also include persons identified on the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications (SSI) List or other OFAC sanctions lists?

&nbsp;

For purposes of implementing section 10(a)(2)(A) of SSIDES, OFAC will interpret the phrase “subject to sanctions imposed by the United States with respect to the Russian Federation” to be persons subject to sanctions under SSIDES, as amended, UFSA, as amended, provisions of CAATSA with respect to the Russian Federation, and any covered Executive order as defined in Section 10(f)(1) of SSIDES. Persons “subject to sanctions imposed by the United States with respect to the Russian Federation” includes persons listed on the SDN List, SSI List, or NS-MBS List, as well as persons subject to sanctions pursuant to OFAC’s 50 percent rule. [01-05-2021]


552. Has the Treasury Department now sanctioned the individuals and entities included in its January 29, 2018 report on senior political figures, oligarchs, and parastatal entities of the Russian Federation?&nbsp; &nbsp;

&nbsp;

No.&nbsp; Pursuant to section 241 of Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act of 2017 (Pub. L. 115-44), the Treasury Department, in consultation with Secretary of State and the Director of National Intelligence, delivered a report on January 29, 2018 to the specified congressional committees regarding significant senior political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation and Russian parastatal entities.&nbsp; &nbsp;

This report is not a “sanctions list.”&nbsp; While some persons mentioned in the report may have been sanctioned pursuant to other authorities, the inclusion of individuals or entities in this report, its appendices, or its classified annex does not and in no way should be interpreted to impose sanctions on those individuals or entities.&nbsp; Inclusion in this report also does not constitute a determination by any agency that any of those individuals or entities meet the criteria for designation under any sanctions program.&nbsp; Moreover, the inclusion of individuals or entities in this report, its appendices, or its classified annex does not, in and of itself, imply, give rise to, or create any restrictions, prohibitions, or limitations on dealings with such persons by either U.S. or foreign persons.&nbsp; Neither does inclusion in the unclassified report indicate that the U.S. Government has information about the individual’s involvement in malign activities.&nbsp; [01-30-2018]


627. What is the purpose of the Executive Order (E.O.) of September 20, 2018, “Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act”?&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Title II of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act, as amended (CAATSA), and the Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014, as amended (UFSA), provide for the imposition of certain sanctions with respect to the Russian Federation.&nbsp; The E.O. of September 20, 2018 provides authority under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to the Secretary of the Treasury to take certain actions to further implement those sanctions and directs agencies of the United States Government to take all appropriate measures within their authority to ensure the full implementation of those sanctions.

Specifically, the E.O., among other things, (i) delegates the implementation of listed sanctions menu items in section 235 of CAATSA and section 4(c) of UFSA regardless of whether that agency is delegated the authority to select the sanctions under section 235 of CAATSA or section 4(c) of UFSA, as applicable, and (ii)&nbsp;authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA and relevant provisions of UFSA and CAATSA to carry out the purposes of the E.O.&nbsp; Section 4(c) of UFSA provides a menu of nine sanctions from which the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary of State must select when imposing sanctions on persons pursuant to sections 4(a) or 4(b) of UFSA.&nbsp; Furthermore, section 235 of CAATSA provides a menu of 12 sanctions from which the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary of State must select when imposing sanctions on persons pursuant to sections 224(a)(2), 231(a), 232(a), and 233(a) of CAATSA. &nbsp;The U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) anticipates promulgating regulations to implement these sanctions.

The E.O. provides for comprehensive implementing and penalties provisions that enable OFAC, among other things, to promulgate regulations and issue administrative subpoenas, licenses, and the full range of civil enforcement actions with respect to sanctions violations. [09-20-2018]&nbsp;&nbsp;

673. What is the purpose of the Executive Order of August 1, 2019, “Administration of Proliferation Sanctions and Amendment of Executive Order 12851.”&nbsp;

&nbsp;

The Executive order (E.O.) of August 1, 2019&nbsp;delegates to the Secretary of the Treasury the implementation of the sanctions related to multilateral development bank assistance and to United States bank loans that are contained in the Chemical and Biological Weapons Control and Warfare Elimination Act of 1991, as amended (“CBW Act”). 22 U.S.C. §5605(b)(2)(A)-(B). The E.O. also provides authority pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to the Secretary of the Treasury to take certain actions to implement the sanction related to bank loans. [08-03-2019]

674. What action is the U.S. government taking under the CBW Act?

&nbsp;

Following the chemical weapons attack in Salisbury, United Kingdom, the Department of State, acting under the CBW Act pursuant to authority delegated to the Secretary of State, made a determination on August 6, 2018 that the Government of the Russian Federation had used chemical weapons in violation of international law or had used lethal chemical weapons against its own nationals. Effective as of August 27, 2018, the United States imposed a first round of sanctions against Russia. On November 6, 2018, the Department of State determined that the Government of the Russian Federation had failed to meet the conditions described in the CBW Act to avoid the imposition of a second round of sanctions, including failing to provide reliable assurances that it would not engage in future chemical weapons attacks. On August 2, 2019, the Department of State selected three additional sanctions to impose on Russia pursuant to the CBW Act, specifically, the sanctions related to U.S. bank loans, opposition to multilateral development bank assistance, and further export restrictions administered by the Department of Commerce. [08-03-2019]

675. How is OFAC implementing sanctions related to U.S. bank loans imposed on Russia pursuant to the CBW Act?

&nbsp;

Pursuant to E.O. of August 1, 2019, 31 C.F.R. § 544.802, and the CBW Act, OFAC issued a Russia-Related Directive under E.O. of August 2, 2019, (the “CBW Act Directive”) , which prohibits U.S. banks from participating in the primary market for non-ruble denominated bonds issued by the Russian sovereign and also prohibits U.S. banks from lending non-ruble denominated funds to the Russian sovereign. These prohibitions do not apply to bonds or loans denominated in rubles. This prohibition only applies to “U.S. banks,” as that term is defined in the CBW Act Directive and consistent with section 4(c)&nbsp;of E.O. of August 1, 2019 and consistent with the definition of U.S. financial institution at 31 C.F.R. § 544.311. The CBW Act Directive includes a definition of the term “Russian sovereign.” The CBW Act Directive is effective as of August 26, 2019. [08-03-2019]

676. What do the CBW Act Directive terms “U.S. bank” and “Russian sovereign” mean?

The CBW Act Directive&nbsp; defines the term “U.S. banks.” This definition is consistent with section 4(c) of E.O. of August 1, 2019, and with the definition of U.S. financial institution at 31 C.F.R. § 544.311. The CBW Act Directive defines the term “Russian sovereign” as any ministry, agency, or sovereign fund of the Russian Federation, including the Central Bank of Russia, the National Wealth Fund, and the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation. This term does not include state-owned enterprises of the Russian Federation. [08-03-2019]


677. How does OFAC’s CBW Act Directive impose costs on the Government of the Russian Federation?&nbsp;

&nbsp;

The CBW Act Directive imposes long-term costs on Russia for its brazen use of chemical weapons and its failure to meet the conditions described in the CBW Act, including the failure to provide reliable assurances that Russia would not engage in future chemical weapons attacks. The Government of the Russian Federation cannot leverage U.S. banks for future non-ruble denominated sovereign bond offerings or benefit from non-ruble denominated loans provided by U.S. banks. [08-03-2019]

678. Does the CBW Act Directive prohibit participation in the secondary market for Russian sovereign debt?

&nbsp;

No, the CBW Act Directive does not prohibit U.S. banks from participating in the secondary market for Russian sovereign debt. [08-03-2019]


869. If a person is subject to non-blocking menu-based sanctions described in section 235(a) of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA), do the same non-blocking sanctions apply to entities owned 50 percent or more by the listed person? 

No. If a person is listed on OFAC’s Non-SDN Menu-Based Sanctions List (NS-MBS List) as subject to only a combination of the sanctions described in section 235(a)(1-8) and (10-11) of CAATSA, as implemented by Executive Order (E.O.) 13849, these non-blocking sanctions do not apply to an entity owned 50 percent or more, individually or in the aggregate, directly or indirectly, by such sanctioned person or persons, unless OFAC separately lists the owned entity on the NS-MBS List as subject to the same sanctions.

However, section 235(a)(9) of CAATSA, as implemented by section 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13849, blocks the property and interests in property of the sanctioned person, and a person subject to that sanction will be added to OFAC’s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN List). The property and interests in property of persons on the SDN List are blocked, and any entity owned 50 percent or more, individually or in the aggregate, directly or indirectly, by blocked persons is itself blocked, as described in OFAC’s 50 Percent Rule.

Individuals sanctioned under section 235(a)(12) of CAATSA (Sanctions on Principal Executive Officers), as implemented by section 1(a)(vi) of E.O. 13849, may be subject to any of the sanctions described in section 235(a). To the extent that the sanctions selected are solely non-blocking sanctions, such person will be listed on the NS-MBS List. Conversely, if the sanctioned individual is subject to the sanction described in section 235(a)(9), the individual is blocked and placed on the SDN List, and the 50 Percent Rule applies. [01/05/2021]



870. On December 14, 2020, OFAC added a person to the Non-SDN Menu-Based Sanctions List (NS-MBS List) and indicated that the person was subject to the loan and credit-related sanction described in section 235(a)(3) of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA). What does this sanction prohibit? 

With respect to a person on the NS-MBS List subject to section 235(a)(3) of CAATSA, as implemented by section 1(a)(i) of Executive Order (E.O.) 13849, U.S. financial institutions are prohibited from making loans or providing credits to the identified person totaling more than $10,000,000 in any 12-month period, unless the person is engaged in activities to relieve human suffering and the loans or credits are provided for such activities. This is not a blocking sanction, but rather a limit on the total amount of loans or credits that can be provided to the identified person within the specified time period by a U.S. financial institution, excluding loans or credit provided to such identified person for activities to relieve human suffering.

Each U.S. financial institution must limit its provision of loans or credits to the identified person to $10,000,000 in any 12-month period, regardless of whether part or all the loans or credits in question has been repaid during the period. This sanction is not a limit on the total loans or credits from all United States financial institutions collectively in the specific time period, but rather an institution-by-institution limit. [01/05/2021]


&nbsp;


&nbsp;


North Korea Sanctions


456. What does Executive Order (E.O.) 13722 do?

E.O. 13722 blocks the Government of North Korea and the Workers’ Party of Korea; prohibits the exportation and reexportation of goods, services (including financial services), and technology to North Korea; and prohibits new investment in North Korea. E.O. 13722 also adds new designation criteria, some of which are mandatory criteria from the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016. [09-21-2017]




457. Does Executive Order (E.O.) 13722 take into account United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 2270 and domestic legislation?

Yes. E.O. 13722 implements certain U.S. obligations under UNSCR 2270 and certain provisions of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016. U.S. sanctions against North Korea are generally broader than UN sanctions. [03-01-2018]




458. Does the blocking of the Government of North Korea and the Workers’ Party of Korea impact the ability of U.S. persons to do business with or conduct transactions with entities in which either party has an interest?

Yes. All property and interests in property of the Government of North Korea and the Workers’ Party of Korea are blocked. U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with them without authorization from OFAC and must block property or interests in property that are in, or come within, the United States or the possession of a U.S. person. [03-16-2016]




459. What impact does the prohibition on the exportation or reexportation of goods, services, or technology under Executive Order (E.O.) 13722 have on the regulations of the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS)?

None. E.O. 13722 prohibits the exportation or reexportation, from the United States, or by a United States person, of any goods, services, or technology to North Korea. BIS maintains authority to license exports and reexports of goods and technology subject to the Export Administration Regulations to persons who are not Specially Designated National (SDNs) and involving the Government of North Korea and the Workers’ Party of Korea. In most instances, to export to designated individuals and entities, U.S. persons must obtain a license from both OFAC and BIS. Regulated financial entities processing a transaction in accordance with an OFAC or a BIS license are encouraged to request a copy of the license to ensure the transaction meets the terms, conditions, and criteria of the license. [03-01-2018]




460. Can U.S. persons do business with entities in North Korea?

No. Unless authorized pursuant to a general or specific license from OFAC and/or BIS, Executive Order (E.O.) 13722 prohibits new investment in North Korea by a U.S. person and the exportation or reexportation, from the United States, or by a U.S. person, of any goods, services, or technology to North Korea. E.O. 13810 (“Imposing Additional Sanctions with Respect to North Korea”) does not modify any of those prohibitions. [03-01-2018]




461. Has OFAC issued general licenses for the North Korea program?

Yes. Several general licenses are incorporated into Subpart E of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations. See OFAC’s webpage on North Korea for any additional general licenses. [03-01-2018]




462. Can U.S. persons continue to send money to family or friends in North Korea?

Yes. Section 510.511 of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations authorizes U.S. depository institutions (including banks), U.S.-registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S.-registered money transmitters to process non-commercial, personal remittances to or from North Korea, or for or on behalf of an individual ordinarily resident in North Korea, up to a maximum of $5,000 per year. Such transactions do not require further authorization from OFAC. This general license does not authorize any transactions by, to, or through a financial institution blocked pursuant to the Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferators Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 544, or the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594, or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to any part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V other than part 510. [03-01-2018]




463. Can nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) provide assistance to North Korea? If so, what types of assistance can NGOs provide? Can NGOs conduct transactions with the Government of North Korea?

Yes. Section 510.512(a) of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations authorizes NGOs to export or reexport services to North Korea that would otherwise be prohibited in support of the following activities: (1) activities to support humanitarian projects to meet basic human needs in North Korea, including drought, flood, and disaster relief; the distribution of food, medicine, and clothing intended to be used to relieve human suffering; the provision of shelter; the provision of clean water, sanitation, and hygiene assistance; the provision of health-related services; assistance for individuals with disabilities; and environmental programs; (2) activities to support democracy building in North Korea, including rule of law, citizen participation, government accountability, universal human rights and fundamental freedoms, access to information, and civil society development projects; (3) activities to support non-commercial development projects directly benefiting the North Korean people, including preventing infectious disease and promoting maternal/child health, sustainable agriculture, and clean water assistance; and (4) activities to support environmental protection, including the preservation and protection of threatened or endangered species and the remediation of pollution or other environmental damage. Additionally, section 510.512(c) authorizes U.S. depository institutions, U.S.-registered brokers or dealers in securities, and U.S.-registered money transmitters to process transfers of funds on behalf of U.S. or third-country NGOs, including to or from North Korea, in support of the activities identified above.

In most instances, to export or reexport goods, services, or technology to designated individuals and entities, U.S. persons must obtain a license from both OFAC and the Bureau of Industry and Security of the Department of Commerce (BIS). A license from BIS is required to export or reexport any item subject to the Export Administration Regulations (15 CFR parts 730 through 744) (EAR) to North Korea, except food and medicine classified as EAR99. Section 510.512(b) authorizes NGOs to export or reexport from a third country to North Korea food and medicine in support of the activities listed above, provided that the food and medicine are not subject to the EAR. The exportation or reexportation by a U.S. person to North Korea from a third country of items that are not subject to the EAR and that are not food or medicine requires a specific license from OFAC.
Section 510.512(d) authorizes NGOs to conduct limited transactions with the Government of North Korea that are necessary for the above-described activities, such as payment of reasonable and customary taxes and other fees. Partnerships and partnership agreements between NGOs and the Government of North Korea or other blocked persons that are necessary for NGOs to provide authorized services are not permitted without a specific license from OFAC. [03-01-2018]

*For guidance on specific questions with respect to charitable donations or NGOs, and the scope of section 510.512, please contact OFAC.




464. Can I travel to North Korea?

While OFAC sanctions do not prohibit U.S. persons from traveling to or from North Korea, as of September 1, 2017, U.S. passports are invalid for travel into, in, or through North Korea. However, in limited circumstances, applicants may be eligible for a Special Validation Passport from the State Department that will allow them to travel for specific purposes. See travel.state.gov for additional details. U.S. persons who intend to travel to North Korea via a Special Validation Passport do not require OFAC authorization to engage in activities that are exempt pursuant to 50 U.S.C. § 1702(b), such as travel to or from any country or the importation or exportation of informational materials. All other activities outside the scope of this exemption would require a specific license from OFAC, unless otherwise authorized by OFAC. See, for example, FAQ 558 for additional information regarding news reporting organizations and journalists. [03-01-2018]




465. What is an example of a person who forms part of the household of an employee of the official mission of the Government of North Korea or of an employee of the United Nations?

Section 510.510 of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations authorizes the provision of goods or services in the United States to employees of the official mission of the Government of North Korea to the United Nations or employees of the United Nations, their families, or other persons forming part of their household. Persons forming part of their household could include spouses, domestic partners, and dependent children. [03-01-2018]



525. What sanctions authority does Executive Order (E.O.) 13810 provide? 

E.O. 13810 provides the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, additional tools to disrupt North Korea’s ability to fund its weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and ballistic missile programs. Specifically, E.O. 13810: (1) establishes several new designation criteria; (2) prohibits vessels and aircraft that have called or landed at a port or place in North Korea in the previous 180 days, and vessels that engaged in a ship-to-ship transfer with such a vessel in the previous 180 days, from entering the United States; (3) provides authority to block any funds transiting accounts linked to North Korea that come within the United States or possession of a United States person; and (4) provides authority to impose sanctions on a foreign financial institution that knowingly conducted or facilitated on or after the date of the order (i) any significant transaction on behalf of certain blocked persons or (ii) any significant transaction in connection with trade with North Korea. The sanctions applicable to foreign financial institutions can be restrictions on correspondent or payable-through accounts or full blocking sanctions.

The prohibitions in E.O. 13810 are implemented in the North Korea Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 510. See particularly §§ 510.201(a) and (d), 510.208, and 510.210. Section 510.518 allows vessels in distress to call at a U.S. port and aircraft to make a nontraffic stop or an emergency landing in the United States. A nontraffic stop includes a stop for any purpose other than taking on or discharging cargo, passengers, or mail. [03-01-2018]



526. How does the Secretary of the Treasury make a determination about funds blocked from certain foreign bank accounts pursuant to section 3 of Executive Order (E.O) 13810 and implemented in 31 C.F.R. § 510.201(d)? How are U.S. persons expected to know which funds are blocked?

Section 3 of E.O. 13810, as implemented in 31 C.F.R. § 510.201(d), authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to determine that a foreign bank account is owned or controlled by a North Korean person or has been used to transfer funds in which any North Korean person has an interest, and to require the blocking of funds that originate from, are destined for, or pass through that account. OFAC will either publish notice in the Federal Register or provide notice directly to affected parties. Absent such a determination or notice from Treasury, this provision does not create any immediate compliance obligations on U.S. persons. [03-01-2018]



555. What activities by foreign financial institutions can subject them to sanctions under the revised North Korea Sanctions Regulations (NKSR) incorporating the provisions of Executive Order (E.O.) 13810?
&nbsp;
Foreign financial institutions have for some time been prohibited from engaging in most North Korea-related transactions that transit the U.S. financial system. In addition, as described in § 510.201(a)(3)(vi) of the NKSR, sanctionable activities of a foreign financial institution include, on or after September 21, 2017, knowingly conducting or facilitating any significant transaction:

On behalf of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13551, E.O. 13687, E.O. 13722, or E.O. 13810, or of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13382 in connection with North Korea-related activities; or
In connection with trade with North Korea. [03-01-2018]



556. When are the prohibitions and strict conditions on foreign financial institutions’ correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13810 effective? 
&nbsp;
Pursuant to E.O. 13810 and the North Korea Sanctions Regulations, a finding by the Treasury Department that a foreign financial institution knowingly engages in one or more of the sanctionable activities is necessary before the Treasury Department can prohibit or impose strict conditions on the opening or maintaining in the United States of correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts for that foreign financial institution.&nbsp; Such a finding also allows the Treasury Department the option of blocking the foreign financial institution. &nbsp;This authority is in addition to that granted Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) under section 311 of the USA PATRIOT Act. [03-01-2018]



557. How will U.S. and foreign financial institutions (FFIs) know that the Treasury Department has imposed prohibitions or strict conditions on FFIs’ correspondent accounts or payable-through accounts in the United States pursuant to § 510.210 of the North Korea Sanctions Regulations (NKSR)?

If, pursuant to the NKSR, Treasury decides to impose strict conditions on maintaining U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts for an FFI, or decides to prohibit the opening or maintaining of U.S. correspondent accounts or U.S. payable-through accounts for an FFI, Treasury will add the name of the FFI, together with the actual strict condition or conditions to be imposed, to the Correspondent Account or Payable-Through Account Sanctions (CAPTA) List on OFAC’s website (www.treasury.gov/ofac), and published in the Federal Register. &nbsp;(The CAPTA list will be included in the Consolidated Sanctions List Data Files, and will be available for download in all Consolidated Sanctions List data file formats.)
If the Treasury Department decides instead to block the property and interests in property of the FFI, the institution’s name will be placed on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons&nbsp;(SDN List). [03-01-2018]


558. Are news reporting organizations and journalists authorized to conduct activities in North Korea?
&nbsp;
News reporting organizations do not require OFAC authorization to engage in activities that are exempt pursuant to 50 U.S.C. § 1702(b), such as travel to or from any country or the importation or exportation of informational materials.&nbsp; All other activities would require a specific license from OFAC.&nbsp; For example, it is prohibited for journalists to employ North Korean government guides or purchase North Korean-origin technology without a specific license.&nbsp; The exemptions contained in IEEPA, 50 U.S.C. § 1702(b), do not apply to transactions involving persons blocked by the United Nations pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolutions. &nbsp;As of September 1, 2017, U.S. passports are invalid for travel into, in, or through North Korea.&nbsp; However, in limited circumstances, applicants may be eligible for a Special Validation Passport from the State Department that will allow them to travel for specific purposes.&nbsp; See travel.state.gov&nbsp;for for additional details. [03-01-2018]


&nbsp;



Venezuela Sanctions

Executive Order 13692 of March 9, 2015 “Blocking Property and Suspending Entry of Certain Persons Contributing to the Situation in Venezuela”.&nbsp; Please note that the FAQs in this section will be updated as appropriate to reflect the designation of PdVSA. 


505. If an official of the Government of Venezuela is designated as a Specially Designated National (SDN), does that mean that the Government of Venezuela is blocked? What are the prohibitions on U.S. persons dealing with a designated government official?

No. The designation of an official of the Government of Venezuela does not mean that the government itself is also blocked. The prohibitions apply to transactions or dealings only with the individuals and entities whose property and interests in property are blocked. However, U.S. persons should be cautious in dealings with the government to ensure that they are not engaged in transactions or dealings, directly or indirectly, with an SDN, for example by entering into contracts that are signed by an SDN, entering into negotiations with an SDN, or by processing transactions, directly or indirectly, on behalf of the SDN, absent authorization or an applicable exemption. [07-19-2018]



Executive Order 13808 of August 24, 2017, &quot;Imposing Additional Sanctions with Respect to the Situation in Venezuela&quot;.&nbsp;&nbsp;Please note that the FAQs in this section will be updated as appropriate to reflect the designation of PdVSA.&nbsp;&nbsp;


507. For purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13808 is Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) considered part of the Government of Venezuela?

Yes, but prohibitions on dealing in new debt vary based on whether the entity involved is a PdVSA entity or another part of the Government of Venezuela. Subsection 1 (a)(i) of&nbsp;E.O.&nbsp;13808&nbsp;prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt if (1) that debt is issued on or after the sanctions effective date (&quot;new debt&quot;); (2) has a maturity of longer than 90 days; and (3) is issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of PdVSA, its property, or its interests in property. Subsection 1 (a)(ii) of E.O.&nbsp;13808 prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new debt with a maturity of longer than 30 days issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of any other segment of the Government of Venezuela, its property, or its interests in property. Subsection 1(a)(ii) of E.O.&nbsp;13808 further prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in equity issued on or after the sanctions effective date (&quot;new equity&quot;) by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the Government of Venezuela (including PdVSA), its property, or its interests in property.&nbsp;[07-19-2018]



508. What do the prohibitions in E.O.&nbsp;13808 mean? Are they blocking actions?

No. E.O. 13808, as amended by E.O. 13857, does not authorize the blocking of property. E.O. 13808, however, should be read in conjunction with other Venezuela-related authorities, such as the E.O. of August 5, 2019, which blocks the Government of Venezuela, and E.O. 13850, as amended, under which certain Government of Venezuela entities, including Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA), are designated.

Subsection 1(a)(i) of E.O. 13808 prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of longer than 90 days and issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of PdVSA, its property, or its interests in property.

Subsection 1(a)(ii) of E.O. 13808 prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in debt issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of longer than 30 days and issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of any other segment of the Government of Venezuela, its property, or its interests in property. That subsection further prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in equity issued on or after August 25, 2017, and issued by, on behalf of, or for the benefit of the Government of Venezuela (including PdVSA), its property, or its interests in property.

Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in bonds issued by the Government of Venezuela prior to August 25, 2017.

Subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13808 prohibits engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in dividend payments or other distributions of profits to the Government of Venezuela by any entity owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela.

Section 1(b) of E.O. 13808 prohibits purchasing any securities from the Government of Venezuela other than securities issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of less than or equal to 90 days (for PdVSA) or 30 days (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela).

E.O. 13808 prohibits transactions by U.S. persons wherever they are located, and transactions within the United States. For transactions involving blocked persons, including the Government of Venezuela and any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in any activity or transaction with such blocked persons unless exempt or otherwise authorized by OFAC. If there is a Venezuela-related general license authorizing dealings with such blocked persons, but the transactions or dealings fall within the prohibitions of E.O. 13808, U.S. persons should reject such transactions, unless an authorization allowing transactions and other dealings otherwise prohibited by E.O. 13808 also applies. U.S. persons must report to OFAC any blocked or rejected transactions within 10 business days. [08-06-2019]



509. Is there a wind-down or safe harbor provision for the prohibitions in E.O. 13808?

General License 1&nbsp;, which expired on September 25, 2017, provided a wind-down period with respect to contracts and other agreements that were in effect prior to August 25, 2017. That general license provided 30 days in which to conduct all transactions and activities otherwise prohibited by Subsections 1(a)(i)-(iii) and (b) of E.O.&nbsp;13808 that were ordinarily incident and necessary to winding down such agreements.&nbsp;There is no wind-down authorization for Subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13808. [07-19-2018]



510. Has OFAC issued general licenses related to E.O. 13808?

OFAC has issued four general licenses related to E.O.&nbsp;13808. General License 1, which expired on September 25, 2017, applied to contracts and other agreements that were in effect prior to August 25, 2017. It provided 30 days in which to conduct all transactions and activities otherwise prohibited by Subsections 1 (a)(i)-(iii) and (b) of E.O. 13808 that were ordinarily incident and necessary to winding down such agreements.

General License 2 authorizes all transactions otherwise prohibited by Subsections 1(a)(i), (a)(ii), and (b) of E.O.&nbsp;13808 provided that the only Government of Venezuela entities involved in the transactions are CITGO Holding, Inc. and any of its subsidiaries.

General License 3 authorizes all transactions related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds contained in the&nbsp;Annex to General License 3 that would otherwise be prohibited by Section 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808. The Annex is also available as a stand-alone document on the Venezuela-related Sanctions page of OFAC’s website. General License 3 further authorizes all transactions related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds issued prior to August 25, 2017, if such bonds were issued by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela, such as CITGO Holding, Inc.

General License 4 authorizes all transactions related to the provision of financing for, and other dealings in debt issued on or after August 25, 2017 related to the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, or replacement parts and components for medical devices, to Venezuela, or to persons in third countries purchasing specifically for resale to Venezuela, provided that the exportation or reexportation is licensed or otherwise authorized by the
Department of Commerce.

All of the general licenses are available on OFAC's website (www.treasury.gov/ofac) on the Venezuela-related Sanctions page. Review them for details. [07-19-2018]



511. What does OFAC interpret to be debt and equity? Can U.S. financial institutions continue to maintain correspondent accounts and process U.S. dollar-clearing transactions for the entities subject to these sanctions?

The term debt includes bonds, loans, extensions of credit, loan guarantees, letters of credit, drafts, bankers acceptances, discount notes or bills, or commercial paper. The term equity includes stocks, share issuances, depositary receipts, or any other evidence of title or ownership.

The prohibitions in Subsections 1(a)(i) of E.O. 13808&nbsp;&nbsp;apply to all transactions involving debt issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of longer than 90 days; all financing in support of such new debt; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such new debt.

The prohibitions in Subsections 1(a)(ii) of&nbsp;E.O.&nbsp;13808 apply to all transactions involving debt issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of longer than 30 days or equity issued on or after August 25, 2017; all financing in support of such new debt or new equity; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such new debt or new equity.

These E.O. 13808 prohibitions extend to rollover of existing debt, if such rollover results in the creation of new debt with a maturity of longer than 90 days (with respect to PdVSA debt) or longer than 30 days (with respect to the rest of the Government of Venezuela debt).

Engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in any equity issued by, on behalf of, or for the Government of Venezuela is permissible, if the equity was issued prior to August 25, 2017 and the transactions, financing, or other dealings are not prohibited by any other Venezuela-related E.O. or other applicable laws or regulations.

Engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in any debt issued by, on behalf of, or for the Government of Venezuela is permissible if the debt was issued prior to August 25, 2017, and, in the case of bonds, either (1) the bonds are included in the Annex to General License 3, or (2) the bonds were issued by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela (such as CITGO Holding, Inc.). The Annex to General License 3 is available as a stand-alone document on the Venezuela-related Sanctions page of OFAC's website. The list will also be published in the Federal Register, as will any changes to the list.

E.O. 13808 prohibits U.S. persons from purchasing securities of any kind – including debt and equity securities – from the Government of Venezuela. The exception to this prohibition is purchasing securities that qualify as (a) debt of PdVSA issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of less than or equal to 90 days, or (b) debt of any other part of the Government of Venezuela issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of less than or equal to 30 days. U.S. persons may deal with the Government of Venezuela as counterparty to transactions involving securities that fall into either of these two categories. U.S. persons are not authorized to purchase, directly or indirectly, bonds in the Annex to General License 3 from the Government of Venezuela.

Unlike the debt-related prohibitions of E.O. 13808, which address certain debt of the Government of Venezuela, including PdVSA, the debt-related provisions of E.O. 13835 address debt that is owed to the Government of Venezuela. The prohibitions in Subsections 1(a)(i) and (ii) of E.O. 13835 apply to all transactions related to, provision of financing for, and other dealings in (i) the purchase of any debt owed to the Government of Venezuela, including accounts receivable, and (ii) any debt owed to the Government of Venezuela that is pledged as collateral after May&nbsp;21, 2018, including accounts receivable, respectively.

The equity-related prohibition in Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13835 applies to any sale, transfer, assignment, or pledging as collateral by the Government of Venezuela of any equity interest in any entity in which the Government of Venezuela has a 50 percent or greater ownership interest; and any dealing in, including provision of services in support of, such transactions.

U.S. financial institutions may continue to maintain correspondent accounts and process U.S. dollar-clearing transactions for the Government of Venezuela, so long as those activities do not involve engaging in transactions prohibited by E.O. 13692 or any subsequent Venezuela-related E.O., or other applicable laws or regulations.&nbsp;[07-19-2018]



512. Why is OFAC imposing sanctions and issuing general licenses specific to bonds and other securities?

The Government of Venezuela is selling assets for much less than they are worth at the expense of the Venezuelan people and using proceeds from these sales to enrich supporters of the regime. Bonds and other securities are among the assets being sold. The prohibitions and related general licenses are meant to prevent U.S. persons from contributing to the Government of Venezuela's corrupt and shortsighted financing schemes while mitigating market disruptions and harm to investors. [08-25-2017]



513. Do the prohibitions imposed pursuant to E.O. 13808 and subsequent Venezuela-related E.O.s also extend to entities owned 50 percent or more by the Government of Venezuela?

In general, yes. These prohibitions apply to transactions related to the Government of Venezuela, which is defined in E.O. 13808&nbsp;to include all entities owned or controlled by the Government of Venezuela. This would normally include entities owned 50 percent or more by the Government of Venezuela because in most instances such entities would be considered controlled by the Government of Venezuela. Also included are any entities that are less than 50% owned, but otherwise controlled, by the Government of Venezuela. Note, however, that General License 2 authorizes all transactions otherwise prohibited by Subsections 1(a)(i), (a)(ii), and (b) of&nbsp;E.O. 13808 provided that the only Government of Venezuela entities involved in the transactions are CITGO Holding, Inc. or its subsidiaries. General License 3 also authorizes all transactions related to, provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds issued prior to August 25, 2017, by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela. [07-19-2018]



514. If a U.S. person entered into a revolving credit facility or long-term loan arrangement for the Government of Venezuela prior to the sanctions effective date, what are the restrictions under E.O. 13808 on drawdowns from that facility? Do all drawdowns and disbursements pursuant to the parent agreement need to carry repayment terms of 90 days or less (for PdVSA) or 30 days or less (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela)?

If a U.S. person entered into a long-term credit facility or loan agreement prior to August 25, 2017, drawdowns and disbursements with repayment terms of 90 days or less (for PdVSA) or 30 days or less (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela) are not prohibited. &nbsp;Drawdowns and disbursements whose repayment terms exceed the applicable authorized tenor are also not prohibited if the terms of such drawdowns and disbursements (including the length of the repayment period, the interest rate applied to the drawdown, and the maximum drawdown amount) were contractually agreed to prior to August 25, 2017, and are not modified on or after August 25, 2017. U.S. persons may not deal in a drawdown or disbursement initiated after August 25, 2017 with a repayment term of longer than 90 days (for PdVSA) or 30 days (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela), if the terms of the drawdown or disbursement were negotiated on or after August 25, 2017. Such a newly negotiated drawdown or disbursement would constitute a prohibited transaction related to new debt under E.O. 13808.
Note that&nbsp;General License 2&nbsp;authorizes all transactions in new debt of the Government of Venezuela of any tenor provided that the only Government of Venezuela entities involved in the transactions are CITGO Holding, Inc. and any of its subsidiaries. [07-19-2018]


515. Is the term &quot;new equity&quot; limited to equity that is issued by an entity owned or controlled by the Government of Venezuela after the sanctions effective date, or would equity purchased or acquired by an entity owned or controlled by the Government of Venezuela from a third party after the sanctions effective date be considered new equity?

Under&nbsp;E.O. 13808, the term &quot;new equity&quot; pertains to equity issued, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela on or after August 25, 2017. That said, E.O. 13808 also prohibits U.S. persons from purchasing any securities – including equity securities issued by a non-sanctioned party – from the Government of Venezuela. The exception to this prohibition is purchasing securities that qualify as (1) debt of PdVSA issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of less than or equal to 90 days, or (2) debt of any other part of the Government of Venezuela issued on or after August 25, 2017, with a maturity of less than or equal to 30 days. U.S. persons are not prohibited from dealing with the Government of Venezuela as counterparty to transactions involving securities that fall into either of these two categories. General License 2 authorizes U.S. persons to deal in such new equity issued by CITGO Holding, Inc. or any of its subsidiaries, or to purchase securities from CITGO Holding, Inc. or any of its subsidiaries, provided that no other entities owned or controlled by the Government of Venezuela are involved. [07-19-2018]



516. Does the prohibition in E.O. 13808 on &quot;dealing in new debt&quot; of longer than 90 days maturity (for PdVSA) or 30 days (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela) prohibit dealing in debt with maturity that exceeds the applicable authorized tenor in which the Government of Venezuela is not directly or indirectly the borrower?

E.O.&nbsp;13808&nbsp;prohibits U.S. persons from dealing in debt of longer than 90 days maturity (for PdVSA) and longer than 30 days maturity (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela) issued on or after August 25, 2017. E.O. 13808 does not prohibit U.S. persons from dealing with the Government of Venezuela as counterparty to most transactions involving debt issued on or after August 25, 2017 by a non-sanctioned party. For example, under E.O. 13808, U.S. persons are not prohibited from dealing with the Government of Venezuela when it plays the role of underwriter on new debt of a non-sanctioned third party exceeding the applicable authorized tenor or accepting payment under a letter of credit with terms exceeding the applicable authorized tenor that is issued, advised, or confirmed by the Government of Venezuela, so long as the Government of Venezuela is not the borrower. [07-19-2018]



517. May a U.S. person consent to a replacement of its participation by a non-U.S. person in a long-term loan facility that was extended to the Government of Venezuela prior to the sanctions effective date?

E.O.&nbsp;13808&nbsp;does not prohibit a U.S. person from engaging in transactions necessary to exit or replace its participation in a long-term loan facility that was extended to the Government of Venezuela prior to August 25, 2017, provided that such transactions do not otherwise run afoul of the order's prohibitions. This would not constitute dealing in new debt. However, U.S. persons involved in such facilities should ensure that all newly negotiated drawdowns or disbursements from the facility utilize repayment terms that are not prohibited by E.O. 13808. See&nbsp;FAQ 394&nbsp;for additional information on what constitutes a permitted drawdown or disbursement from an existing long-term loan obligation. [07-19-2018]


518. Is a U.S. person permitted under E.O. 13808 to extend credit for greater than 90 days (for PdVSA) or 30 days (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela) to a non-sanctioned party for the purpose of purchasing goods or services from the Government of Venezuela?

&nbsp;

E.O.&nbsp;13808 does not prohibit U.S. persons from extending credit for longer than 90 days (for PdVSA) or 30 days (for the rest of the Government of Venezuela) to non-sanctioned parties for the purpose of purchasing goods or services from the Government of Venezuela, so long as the Government of Venezuela is not the indirect borrower. [07-19-2018]


519. How can I help the Venezuelan people while making sure to abide by the U.S. sanctions?

While E.O. of August 5, 2019 blocks all property and interests in property of the Government of Venezuela that come into the possession or control of U.S. persons or U.S. jurisdiction, the Venezuelan people are not subject to comprehensive U.S. sanctions. Sanctions do not preclude U.S. persons from exporting or reexporting items to Venezuela provided that the transactions do not involve sanctioned individuals or entities or certain prohibited activities. Those involved in exports or reexports to Venezuela, including exports or reexports related to activity authorized by OFAC, should also consult the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security to ensure eligibility of exportation or reexportation under its authorities. Likewise, the E.O. of August 5, 2019 does not prohibit transactions involving the Government of Venezuela that relate to the provision of articles such as food, clothing, and medicine intended to be used to relieve human suffering. OFAC has also issued General License 4C to authorize further transactions ordinarily incident and necessary to the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, replacement parts and components for medical devices, or software updates for medical devices to Venezuela, or to persons in third countries purchasing specifically for resale to Venezuela. See General License 4C for details and relevant definitions.

In addition, OFAC maintains several complementary general licenses designed to support assistance to the Venezuelan people. General License 16B authorizes transactions and activities ordinarily incident and necessary to processing noncommercial, personal remittances involving certain financial institutions. General License 20A authorizes official activities of certain international organizations to engage in transactions with the Government of Venezuela. General License 24 authorizes transactions involving the Government of Venezuela incident to the receipt and transmission of telecommunications, as well as transactions of common carriers involving the Government of Venezuela incident to the receipt or transmission of mail and packages between the United States and Venezuela. General License 25 authorizes the exportation or reexportation, directly or indirectly, from the United States or by U.S. persons, wherever located, to or involving the Government of Venezuela of services, software, hardware, and technology incident to the exchange of communications over the Internet. General License 26 authorizes the provision and receipt of nonscheduled emergency medical services, and the provision of other medical services involving the Government of Venezuela. General License 29 authorizes nongovernmental organizations to engage in activities with the Government of Venezuela in support of humanitarian projects, democracy building, education, non-commercial development projects directly benefiting the Venezuelan people, and environmental protection in Venezuela.

In addition to these general licenses, OFAC can also issue specific licenses to authorize particular transactions that may otherwise be prohibited by the sanctions, as long as those transactions are in the foreign policy interests of the United States. For additional information, please see FAQ 665 and OFAC’s “Guidance Related to the Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Support to the Venezuelan People.” [08-06-2019]



520. Do I need a specific license from OFAC to send U.S.-origin food or medicine to Venezuela?

No, as long as your transaction or other dealing does not involve property or interests in property of a Specially Designated National. That said, you should make sure that your proposed export is authorized by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security (&quot;BIS&quot;), which maintains jurisdiction over the export of items to Venezuela. For further guidance regarding the exportation of items to Venezuela, contact BIS by phone at (202) 482-4252. [08-25-2017]



521. I want to provide long-term financing to the Government of Venezuela to help with the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, components, or replacement parts and components for medical devices to Venezuela. Is that allowed?

Yes. General License 4 authorizes all financing and other dealings in new debt related to the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, components, or replacement parts for medical devices, to Venezuela, or to persons in third countries purchasing specifically for resale to Venezuela, provided that the exportation or reexportation is licensed or otherwise authorized by the Department of Commerce. Note, however, that General License 4 does not otherwise authorize any transaction that is prohibited by E.O. 13808, E.O. 13692, or any part of 31 C.F.R. Chapter V. [08-25-2017]



522. Other than through the existing general licenses, under what circumstances might U.S. persons be authorized to deal in new debt of greater than 30 or 90 days issued by the Government of Venezuela?

In the Lima Declaration of August 8, 2017, twelve countries across the Americas refused to recognize the Constituent Assembly or the laws it adopts because of its illegitimate nature, while at the same time fully backing the democratically elected National Assembly. We stand in solidarity with our friends and allies in the region.&nbsp;If the democratically elected Venezuelan National Assembly approved a new debt issuance by the Government of Venezuela that E.O.&nbsp;13808&nbsp; would prohibit U.S. persons from dealing in, the United States would consider using licensing authority to allow U.S. persons to deal in the issuance. [08-25-2017]




523. The Venezuela Government International Bond issued on December 29, 2016 (ISIN USP97475AQ39, CUSIP AM1108092) is not included in the Annex to General License 3.&nbsp;Is that intentional?&nbsp; Did OFAC intentionally exclude any other bonds from the Annex?

OFAC intentionally excluded the Venezuela Government International Bond issued on December 29, 2016 (ISIN USP97475AQ39, CUSIP AM1108092) (“the 2036 bond”) from the Annex to General License 3 because available information indicates that the Government of Venezuela is both the bond’s issuer and sole holder.&nbsp; At this time, the 2036 bond is the only bond we have identified and purposely omitted from the Annex to General License 3.

&nbsp;

Parties who identify additional bonds that they believe should be added to the Annex to General License 3 should email OFAC at OFAC_Feedback@treasury.gov with information about the bond (including its ISIN, CUSIP, description, issuance date, maturity date, and prospectus/terms and conditions) and provide their rationale for adding it to the Annex (e.g., a party other than the Government of Venezuela holds the bond).&nbsp; No particular characteristics or circumstances will guarantee a bond’s addition to the Annex to General License 3; OFAC will evaluate each request on a case-by-case basis.

&nbsp;

Paragraph (b) of General License 3 authorizes all transactions related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds that were issued both (i) prior to August 25, 2017, and (ii) by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela.&nbsp; Consequently, while bonds that meet both of these criteria may not be included in the Annex to General License&nbsp;3, U.S. persons are nevertheless authorized to deal in these bonds. [07-19-2018]


524.&nbsp;&nbsp;I&nbsp;would like to engage in derivatives transactions, including credit default swaps, related to a reference bond that is in the Annex to General License 3.&nbsp; Is that permitted?Paragraphs (a) and (b) of General License 3 authorize all transactions related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds that are either listed in the Annex to General License 3 or that were issued both (i) prior to August 25, 2017, and (ii) by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela (“General License 3 bonds”).&nbsp; Buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in a derivative that references a General License 3 bond is a transaction related to the bond itself.&nbsp; General License 3 therefore authorizes such purchases and sales, as well as related transactions.&nbsp; One corollary to this authorization is that U.S. persons are not authorized to buy, sell, or otherwise deal in derivatives that reference bonds that (i) were issued by the Government of Venezuela prior to August 25, 2017, but (ii) are not General License 3 bonds. [07-19-2018]



527. What does OFAC consider to be “profit” under Subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13808?

For purposes of Subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13808, “profit” is net income after taxes. For a business, this is generally total sales minus total costs and expenses. For example, transactions involving the Government of Venezuela, including PDVSA, related to payments for goods and services, taxes, or royalties are not considered “profit.” Similarly, principal and interest payments related to bonds and promissory notes are not considered “distributions of profit” for purposes of Subsection 1(a)(iv) of E.O. 13808, and so that subsection does not prohibit U.S. persons from making such payments. Restrictions imposed under other subsections of E.O. 13808, however, may still apply. For example, pursuant to Subsection 1(a)(iii), U.S. persons are prohibited from dealing in principal and interest payments related to bonds that were issued by the Government of Venezuela before August 25, 2017 unless U.S. persons are authorized to deal in the relevant bonds under General License 3. [10-03-2017]



547. Can U.S. Persons participate in meetings about restructuring outstanding Venezuelan and PDVSA debt?

U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions or dealings with persons named on OFAC’s SDN List, including dealing with an SDN in the context of efforts to restructure Venezuelan and Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) debt. (See FAQ 505 for additional information). Provided there is no SDN involvement, General License 3 authorizes U.S. persons to engage in all transactions related to bonds specified in the Annex to General License 3, including participating in negotiations regarding such bonds. General License 3 does not authorize any transaction by a U.S. person or within the United States that involves the creation or subsequent dealing in new debt of PdVSA or debt otherwise of the Government of Venezuela with a maturity of greater than 90 days or 30 days, respectively, absent a license from OFAC. OFAC would consider license applications involving any such new debt or equity on a case-by-case basis, and base licensing determinations on the facts and circumstances of the particular application. As stated in FAQ 522, the United States government would consider using licensing authority to allow U.S. persons to deal in new debt of the Government of Venezuela approved by the democratically elected Venezuelan National Assembly. [07-19-2018]



548. Subsection 1(a)(i) of E.O. 13808 prohibits U.S. persons from dealing in new debt with a maturity of greater than 90 days of PdVSA. For purposes of E.O. 13808, does the term “PdVSA” include all PdVSA subsidiaries? 

Yes. For purposes of E.O. 13808, the prohibition in Subsection 1(a)(i) would apply to PdVSA and extend to all PdVSA subsidiaries, unless authorized by OFAC. Note that General License 2 authorizes certain activities involving specified PdVSA subsidiaries. [11-09-2017]




553. For purposes of E.O. 13808, what is “new debt”?
OFAC considers “new debt” to be debt created on or after August 25, 2017.&nbsp; See FAQ 511 for examples of “debt,” which includes loans and extensions of credit.
&nbsp;
OFAC does not consider debt that was created prior to August 25, 2017 to be “new debt” for purposes of E.O. 13808 so long as the terms of the debt instrument (including, for example, the length of the repayment period or any interest rate applied) agreed to by the parties do not change on or after August 25, 2017.&nbsp; Such preexisting debt does not need to conform to the 30- or 90-day tenors imposed under E.O. 13808, and U.S. persons may collect and accept payment for such debt regardless of whether the relevant segment of the Government of Venezuela, including PdVSA, pays during the agreed-upon payment period.&nbsp;[02-12-2018]



554. For debt created on or after August 25, 2017, are U.S. persons permitted to accept payment from PdVSA or other segments of the Government of Venezuela if payment for a debt is not received within the applicable period specified in E.O. 13808 (90 days for PdVSA, 30 days for other segments of the Government of Venezuela)?
&nbsp;
No, absent a specific license or other authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; As explained in FAQ 553, debt – which includes extensions of credit for sales of goods or services – created on or after August 25, 2017 constitutes “new debt,” and E.O. 13808 prohibits U.S. persons and persons within the United States from engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, or otherwise dealing in new debt with a maturity of longer than 90 days for PdVSA or 30 days for other segments of the Government of Venezuela.&nbsp; Because receiving payments outside of these specified maturity periods generally constitutes a prohibited dealing in debt, U.S. persons should ensure that payment terms accord with the applicable debt prohibition.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
In circumstances where PdVSA or another segment of the Government of Venezuela fails to pay a debt in full within 90 or 30 days, as applicable, U.S. persons must obtain a specific license from OFAC before accepting payment after the expiration of the applicable period.
&nbsp;
To mitigate potential harm to U.S. persons who have not received payment related to new debt incurred by PdVSA or another segment of the Government of Venezuela within the applicable maturity period, OFAC will, on a case-by-case basis, grant specific licenses to U.S. persons to deal in the collection or receipt of such payment, provided that:&nbsp; (1) PdVSA or another segment of the Government of Venezuela is in debt to the applicant based on an agreement that complies with applicable sanctions requirements and prohibitions; (2) the debt is “new debt” created before March 14, 2018; (3) the relevant segment of the Government of Venezuela failed to pay its debt within the agreed-upon, authorized payment period; and (4) the transaction is not otherwise prohibited under E.O. 13808, E.O. 13692, or any part of 31 C.F.R. Chapter V.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
License applications involving circumstances that do not meet these criteria will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with a presumption of denial, with the exception of activity that is in U.S. national security or foreign policy interests, including humanitarian-related transactions, legal services, or personal communication-related services.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
Consistent with FAQ 553, debt created prior to August 25, 2017 – including extensions of credit related to goods or services provided to PdVSA or another segment of the Government of Venezuela – would not constitute “new debt,” provided that the parties do not change the terms of the debt.&nbsp;[02-12-2018]&nbsp;



Executive Order 13827 &quot;Taking Additional Steps to Deal with the Situation in Venezuela&quot;. Please note that the FAQs in this section will be updated as appropriate to reflect the designation of PdVSA.&nbsp;&nbsp;


564. For purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13827&nbsp;&quot;Taking Additional Steps to Deal with the Situation in Venezuela&quot; of March 19 2018, are the “petro” and “petro-gold” considered a “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” that was issued by, for, or on behalf of the Government of Venezuela on or after January 9, 2018? 

Answer: Yes. [03-19-2018]



565. For purposes of E.O. 13827 &quot;Taking Additional Steps to Deal with the Situation in Venezuela&quot; of March 19, 2018, is Venezuela’s traditional fiat currency, bolivar fuerte, considered a “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” that was issued by, for, or on behalf of the Government of Venezuela on or after January 9, 2018?

Answer: No. [03-19-2018]




566. I participated in the pre-sale for a Government of Venezuela-issued “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” before E.O. 13827 &quot;Taking Additional Steps to Deal with the Situation in Venezuela&quot; of March 19, 2018, became effective.&nbsp;&nbsp;Am I allowed to sell, trade, use, or otherwise deal in such “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” on or after the sanctions effective date?

Absent authorization from OFAC, U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions related to, providing financing for, and otherwise dealing in any “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” that was issued by, for, or on behalf of the Government of Venezuela on or after January 9, 2018. OFAC would consider license applications involving Government of Venezuela-issued “digital currency, digital coin, or digital token” on a case-by-case basis and base licensing determinations on the facts and circumstances of the particular application. [03-19-2018]



595.&nbsp;What does Venezuela-related General License 5F authorize? 

The President issued Executive Order (E.O.) 13835 on May 21, 2018. Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13835 prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in transactions related to the sale, transfer, assignment, or pledging as collateral by the Government of Venezuela (GOV) of any equity interest in an entity owned 50 percent or more by the GOV. One effect of subsection 1(a)(iii) is to require authorization before U.S. persons may engage in certain transactions regarding any equity interest in an entity owned 50 percent or more by the GOV. Subsequent to the issuance of E.O. 13835, OFAC received inquiries about how and whether subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13835 could affect the ability to enforce bondholder rights to the CITGO shares serving as collateral for the Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) 2020 8.5 percent bond. OFAC issued General License 5 on July 19, 2018, which removed E.O. 13835 as an obstacle to holders of the PdVSA 2020 8.5 percent bond gaining access to their collateral.

General License 5 was replaced and superseded on October 24, 2019, and most recently by General License 5F, with a delay in effectiveness until July 21, 2021. Between October 24, 2019 and July 21, 2021 (the date the authorization in General License 5F becomes effective), there is no authorization in effect that licenses against subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13835 applicable to the holders of the PdVSA 2020 8.5 percent bond. As a result, during such period, transactions related to the sale or transfer of CITGO shares in connection with the PdVSA 2020 8.5 percent bond are prohibited, unless specifically authorized by OFAC.

To the extent an agreement may be reached on proposals to restructure or refinance payments due to the holders of the PdVSA 2020 8.5 percent bond, additional licensing requirements may apply. OFAC would encourage parties to apply for a specific license and would have a favorable licensing policy toward such an agreement. [12-23-2020]

&nbsp;


596. Does E.O. 13835 prohibit me from attaching and executing against assets of the Government of Venezuela, including vessels, properties, or financial assets, if I have a legal judgment against the Government of Venezuela?

No, provided that the attachment does not involve (i) debt owed to the Government of Venezuela (including accounts receivable) that was pledged as collateral after the effective date of E.O. 13835 (per subsection 1(a)(ii) of the E.O.), or (ii) an equity interest in any entity in which the Government of Venezuela has a 50 percent or greater ownership interest (per subsection 1(a)(iii) of the E.O.). &nbsp;OFAC authorization would likely be required for attachment of equity interest in any entity in which the Government of Venezuela has a 50 percent or greater ownership interest.&nbsp; OFAC would consider license applications seeking to attach and execute against such equity interests on a case-by-case basis. [07-19-2018]


Executive Order 13850 &quot;Blocking Property of Additional Persons Contributing to the Situation in Venezuela&quot;


628. What is the objective of Executive Order (E.O.) 13850 of November 1, 2018, &quot;Blocking Property of Additional Persons Contributing to the Situation in Venezuela&quot;?

E.O. 13850&nbsp;is designed to counter rampant corruption within the Government of Venezuela, which continues to exacerbate the economic and humanitarian crises afflicting the Venezuelan people. As we have worked to disrupt the Government of Venezuela’s sources of corrupt patronage, the Maduro regime has sought new means by which to enrich itself at the expense of its people. By issuing this E.O., the U.S. government is acting to prevent the regime and its corrupt associates from further exploiting Venezuela’s people and resources. The E.O. provides a powerful tool to impose costs on those who unjustly benefit from dishonest or fraudulent conduct, illicit activity, and/or deceptive transactions within Venezuela’s gold sector or other identified sectors, or in relation to the Government of Venezuela or its projects or programs. [11-01-2018] ?




629. Executive order (E.O.) 13850 of November 1, 2018, &quot;Blocking Property of Additional Persons Contributing to the Situation in Venezuela,&quot; authorizes the imposition of sanctions on persons operating in Venezuela’s gold sector. For purposes of this E.O., how will OFAC target those who “operate in the gold sector of the Venezuela economy or any other sector of the Venezuela economy as may be determined by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Secretary of State”?

OFAC expects to use its discretion to target in particular those who operate corruptly in the gold or other identified sectors of the Venezuela economy, and not those who are operating legitimately in such sectors. This includes, for example, persons engaging in dishonest or fraudulent conduct, illicit activity, or deceptive transactions within Venezuela’s gold sector or other identified Venezuela sectors, with the purpose or effect of misappropriating Venezuelan resources in those sectors for personal, professional, or political gain. [11-01-2018]






650.&nbsp;What is the expected level of due diligence associated with ensuring that transfers or divestment of debt (and, in the case of Venezuela-related General License 9B, equity) in certain blocked persons (in the case of General License 9B) or the Government of Venezuela (in the case of General License 3C) are consistent with the terms of General Licenses 3C and 9B?&nbsp;
Paragraph (a) of&nbsp;General License&nbsp;9B&nbsp;requires that any div estment or transfer by U.S. persons of debt of, or equity in, Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) (or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest), that was issued prior to August 25, 2017, be to a non-U.S. person, absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; Similarly, paragraph (a) of General License 3C requires that any divestment or transfer by U.S. persons of holdings in the bonds listed in the Annex to General License 3C (GL 3C Bonds) be to a non U.S. person, absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; General Licenses 3C and 9B also authorize U.S. persons to facilitate the transfer or divestment of such debt (and, in the case of General License 9B, debt and equity), so long as the divestment or transfer of any holdings in such debt or equity by a U.S. person is to a non-U.S. person, absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; Financial institutions or registered broker-dealers in securities may rely upon the information ordinarily available to them for purposes of conducting the activities authorized under General Licenses 3C and 9B.

&nbsp;
Consistent with OFAC&nbsp;FAQ 116if a U.S. broker or financial institution involved in a transfer or divestment of such debt (or, in the case of General License 9B, debt or equity) pursuant to paragraph (a) in either General License 3C and 9B has information in its possession leading it to know or have reason to know that the buyer is a U.S. person, then the U.S. broker or financial institution will be held responsible if it does not take appropriate steps to ensure that the trade is not consummated, absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; OFAC expects U.S. persons to conduct due diligence on their own direct customers, and OFAC will consider the totality of the circumstances surrounding the processing of the transaction to determine what, if any, enforcement action to take. [02-11-2019]



651.&nbsp;What happened to the Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) bonds, or bonds issued by any entity directly or indirectly owned 50 percent or more by PdVSA, that were previously included in the Annex to General License 3?&nbsp;?&nbsp;

Bonds issued by PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest that was previously listed in the Annex to General License 3 (which has been superseded by General License 3B?) are now listed in the Annex to General License 9.&nbsp; All Venezuela-related general licenses are provided on OFAC’s website (www.treasury.gov/ofac) on the Venezuela-related Sanctions page.&nbsp; [01-31-2019]?



652.&nbsp;Is it permissible for mutual funds and exchange traded funds (collectively, “funds”) that are U.S. persons to buy, sell, or otherwise engage in transactions related to debt, equity, or other holdings in an entity that appears on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List), or of an entity owned 50 percent or more, individually or in the aggregate, by an individual or entity on the SDN List?&nbsp;&nbsp;

No.&nbsp;A fund that is a U.S. person may not buy, sell, or otherwise engage in transactions related to&nbsp;debt, equity, or other holdings in blocked persons and must block such holdings, unless authorized by OFAC via general or specific license.&nbsp;A U.S. fund that contains such blocked holdings generally is not itself considered a blocked entity, and U.S. persons may continue to invest in the fund and the fund may continue to operate.&nbsp;The fund may divest itself of blocked holdings only with OFAC authorization.&nbsp;[01-31-2019]



653.&nbsp;I am the manager of a Synthetic Exchange Traded Fund (ETF), which tracks a basket of debt, equity or other holdings in order to provide a return approximating the returns on that basket, but which does not actually hold the underlying debt, equity, or other holdings contained in the basket.&nbsp; May I continue to offer such funds, and may U.S. persons trade in shares of these funds, if the underlying basket being tracked contains holdings in an entity or entities that appear on OFAC’s List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List), or of an entity owned 50 percent or more, individually or in the aggregate, by an individual or entity on the SDN List?&nbsp;&nbsp;

Yes, so long as the underlying basket being tracked includes less than a predominant share by value of debt, equity, or other holdings in blocked persons.&nbsp; U.S. and non-U.S. persons may continue to constitute, offer, and trade in funds that include only synthetic risk in debt, equity, or other holdings in blocked persons, provided the underlying basket being tracked includes less than a predominant share by value of debt, equity, or other holdings in blocked persons.&nbsp; [01-31-2019].



654.&nbsp;With regard to Venezuela-related General License 11, “Authorizing Certain Activities Necessary to Maintenance or Wind Down of Operations or Existing Contracts with Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A.,” are U.S. financial institutions required to reject funds transfers involving both Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or entities owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by PdVSA, and a non-U.S. entity located in a country other than the United States or Venezuela?

General License 11 authorizes, with certain exceptions, U.S. person employees of non-U.S. entities located in a country other than the United States or Venezuela to engage in transactions and activities prohibited by Executive Order 13850 that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the maintenance or wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreements involving PdVSA or entities owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by PdVSA that were in effect prior to January 28, 2019.&nbsp; The authorization is valid through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on March 29, 2019.&nbsp; In accordance with paragraph (b) of General License 11, and for purposes of activities authorized under General License 11 only, U.S. financial institutions are authorized to reject, rather than block, funds transfers that involve both PdVSA or any entity owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by PdVSA and a non-U.S. entity located in a country other than the United States or Venezuela, provided that: (i) the funds transfers originate and terminate outside the United States; (ii) the originator and the beneficiary are non-U.S. persons; (iii) the funds are not destined for a blocked account on the books of a U.S. person; and (iv) the funds transfers otherwise are effected in accordance with paragraph (c) of General License 11.&nbsp; U.S. financial institutions are not required to block funds transfers meeting the conditions in paragraph (b) of General License 11, but they are prohibited from processing such transactions. [01-31-2019]?



655.&nbsp;Can U.S. persons purchase petroleum and petroleum products from Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?

Until 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, April 28, 2019, U.S. persons are authorized to engage in all transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the purchase and importation of petroleum and petroleum products from PdVSA or from entities owned 50&nbsp;percent or more by PdVSA, provided that any payments to PdVSA, entities in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, or other blocked persons for such purchases are made into a blocked, interest-bearing account located in the United States in accordance with 31 C.F.R. § 591.203 (unless authorized by other Venezuela-related general licenses).&nbsp; After the expiration of the 90-day wind-down period, as described in General License&nbsp;7 and&nbsp;General License&nbsp;12, the purchase by U.S. persons of petroleum and petroleum products from PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest will be prohibited absent authorization from OFAC (see also General License 10 and FAQ 656?&nbsp;authorizing the purchase of refined petroleum products by U.S. persons in Venezuela, and General License 8 authorizing purchases of petroleum and petroleum products from PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest for certain listed entities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to their operations in Venezuela).&nbsp; [01-31-2019]&nbsp;&nbsp;



656.&nbsp;Can U.S. persons in Venezuela purchase gasoline or other refined petroleum products from Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?&nbsp;&nbsp;

Yes.&nbsp; Venezuela-related General License 10 authorizes U.S. persons in Venezuela to purchase refined petroleum products, including gasoline, for personal, commercial, or humanitarian uses from PdVSA, or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp; General License 10 authorizes, among other things, purchases of refined petroleum products by U.S. commercial airlines providing passenger or cargo services in Venezuela for the purposes of fueling aircraft in Venezuela.&nbsp; General License 10 also would authorize purchase for use to power a means of conveyance or a household good (such as a generator) in Venezuela.&nbsp; General License&nbsp;10, however, does not authorize U.S. persons to purchase refined petroleum products in Venezuela from PdVSA for purposes of executing a commercial transaction to resell, transfer, export, or reexport such refined petroleum products.&nbsp; [01-31-2019]?



657.&nbsp;I am a non-U.S. entity that purchases petroleum and petroleum products from Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or an entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp; Am I now prohibited from purchasing petroleum and petroleum products from these companies?

Transactions to purchase petroleum and petroleum products from PdVSA or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, and that involve U.S. persons or any other U.S. nexus (e.g., transactions involving the U.S. financial system or U.S. commodity brokers) must be wound down by April 28, 2019 pursuant to Venezuela-related General License 12.&nbsp; In addition, under General License 11?, U.S. person employees and contractors of non-U.S. companies located in a country other the United States or Venezuela are authorized to engage in certain maintenance or wind-down transactions with PdVSA, or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, March 29, 2019.&nbsp; (See FAQ&nbsp;654?.)&nbsp; [01-31-2019]



658.&nbsp;Can U.S. persons purchase, or engage in other transactions including swaps and non-cash transactions involving the purchase or exchange of, petroleum and petroleum products, if Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest is not directly involved in the transaction?

After 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, April 28, 2019, as described in Venezuela-related General License&nbsp;7 and General License&nbsp;12, any transactions (including swaps and non-cash transactions) involving the purchase or exchange of petroleum or petroleum products in which PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest has a direct or indirect interest will be prohibited for U.S. persons absent authorization from OFAC (see also General License 10 and FAQ 656?).&nbsp; Prior to April 28, 2019, any funds or tangible proceeds of a swap or non-cash agreement owed to PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest as a result of such purchases or exchanges must be blocked, and, in the case of blocked funds, must be placed into a blocked interest-bearing account in the United States.&nbsp; In the case of blocked non-cash proceeds, please reach out to OFAC for further guidance. [01-31-2019]&nbsp;



659.&nbsp;Does Venezuela-related General License 12 authorize U.S. persons to export goods, services, and technology from the United States to Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest during the wind-down period?&nbsp;

General License 12? authorizes, until 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, February 27, 2019, all transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of operations, contracts, or other agreements that were in effect prior to January 28, 2019.&nbsp; This authorization includes the importation into, or the exportation from, the United States of goods, services, or technology (other than the exportation of diluents) involving PdVSA or any entity in which it owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest (other than ALBA de Nicaragua (ALBANISA) or any entity in which ALBANISA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest). [01-31-2019]&nbsp;&nbsp;



660.&nbsp;When will sanctions be lifted on Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?&nbsp;

The path to sanctions relief for PdVSA and its subsidiaries is through the expeditious transfer of control of the company to Interim President Juan Guaidó or a subsequent, democratically elected government that is committed to taking concrete and meaningful actions to combat corruption, restore democracy, and respect human rights. &nbsp;A bona fide transfer of control will ensure that the assets of Venezuela are preserved for the country’s people, rather than misused and diverted by former President Nicolas Maduro. &nbsp;Treasury will continue to use its economic tools to support Interim President Guaidó, the National Assembly, and the Venezuelan people’s efforts to restore their democracy. [01-31-2019]?&nbsp;



661. What does General License 9G authorize with respect to Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA) debt and equity and what are the implications for U.S. and non-U.S. persons?&nbsp;&nbsp;
General License 9G&nbsp; authorizes U.S. persons to engage in all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of Executive Order (E.O.) 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884,&nbsp; that are ordinarily incident and necessary to dealings in any debt (including, but not limited to, the bonds listed in the Annex to General License 9G) of, or equity in, PdVSA, or any entity directly or indirectly owned 50 percent or more by PdVSA that was issued prior to August 25, 2017 (together, PdVSA Securities), provided that if a U.S. person decides to sell or transfer any interests in such debt or equity, it must sell or transfer the interests to a non-U.S. person unless otherwise authorized by OFAC.&nbsp; The authorization in GL 9G includes, for example, engaging in transactions related to the receipt and processing of interest or principal payments, and acting as a custodian for U.S. and non-U.S. persons’ holdings in PdVSA Securities, including acting as a custodian for a non-U.S. person after that person has received PdVSA Securities from a U.S. person in a divestment transaction.


Paragraph (c) of General License 9G authorizes all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, that are ordinarily incident and necessary to facilitating, clearing, and settling trades of holdings in PdVSA Securities, provided such trades were placed prior to 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time on January 28, 2019; this authorization aims to ensure that trades that were placed prior to the imposition of blocking sanctions on PdVSA are allowed to settle in the ordinary course, irrespective of whether the sale or transfer is to a non-U.S. person.



Paragraph (d) of this general license previously authorized all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, including transactions in securities and security derivatives, that were ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of financial contracts or other agreements that were entered into prior to 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time on January 28, 2019, involving, or linked to, PdVSA Securities.&nbsp; This authorization allowed certain financial contracts and agreements that were entered into prior to the imposition of blocking sanctions on PdVSA that involved or were linked to PdVSA Securities to be wound down, including resolving the purchase and sale of securities, securities lending, repurchase agreements, and swaps and derivative contracts in securities.&nbsp; This authorization, which was included in prior versions of this general license, expired at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on March 31, 2020.&nbsp; Parties may apply for a specific license to engage in activity previously authorized by paragraph (d) of General License 9G.


Paragraph (e) of General License 9G authorizes all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, that are ordinarily incident and necessary to dealings in any bonds issued by PDV Holdings, Inc., CITGO Holdings, Inc., or any of their subsidiaries, prior to August 25, 2017.

U.S. persons may continue to hold their interests in PdVSA Securities, but are subject to certain restrictions on the sale of those interests in the secondary market.&nbsp; General License 9G does not generally authorize U.S. persons to purchase or acquire new interests in PdVSA Securities, and as a result, such purchases are prohibited absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; However, U.S. persons may purchase or invest in PdVSA Securities pursuant to paragraph (a), as described by paragraph (f)(2), of General License 9G, provided that such transactions are ordinarily incident and necessary to the divestment and transfer of holdings in PdVSA Securities.&nbsp; While non-U.S. persons may continue to deal in PdVSA Securities, to the extent transactions involve U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system, such transactions must comply with the terms of General License 9G and may not involve sales of interests in such PdVSA Securities to U.S. persons (other than as set forth in GL 9G and described above) as U.S. persons are largely prohibited from purchasing such interests. [05-12-2020]


662.&nbsp;What does General License 3H authorize with respect to Government of Venezuela debt, and what are the implications for U.S. and non-U.S. persons?

General License 3H authorizes U.S. persons to engage in all transactions prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of Executive Order (E.O.) 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in the bonds specified in the Annex to General License 3H (GL 3H Bonds), provided that any divestment or transfer of, or facilitation of divestment or transfer of, any holdings in such bonds be to a non-U.S. person unless otherwise authorized by OFAC.&nbsp; The authorization in GL 3H includes, for example, engaging in transactions related to the receipt and processing of interest or principal payments, and acting as a custodian for U.S. and non-U.S. persons’ holdings in GL 3H Bonds, including acting as a custodian for a non-U.S. person after that person has received GL 3H Bonds from a U.S. person in a divestment transaction.

Paragraph (b) of General License 3H authorizes all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, that are ordinarily incident and necessary to facilitating, clearing, and settling trades of holdings in the GL 3H Bonds, provided such trades were placed prior to 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time on February 1, 2019; this authorization aims to ensure that trades that were placed prior to February 1, 2019, are allowed to settle in the ordinary course, irrespective of whether the sale or transfer is to a non-U.S. person.

Paragraph (c) of this general license previously authorized all transactions and activities prohibited by Subsection 1(a)(iii) of E.O. 13808 or by E.O. 13850, each as amended by E.O. 13857, or by E.O. 13884, including transactions in securities and security derivatives, that were ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of financial contracts or other agreements that were entered into prior to 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time on February 1, 2019, involving, or linked to, the GL 3H Bonds.&nbsp; This authorization allowed certain financial contracts and agreements that were entered into prior to February 1, 2019, that involved or were linked to the GL 3H Bonds to be wound down, including resolving the purchase and sale of securities, securities lending, repurchase agreements, and swaps and derivative contracts in securities.&nbsp; This authorization, which was included in prior versions of this general license, expired at 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time on March 31, 2020.&nbsp; Parties may apply for a specific license to engage in activity previously authorized by paragraph (c) of General License 3H.

Paragraph (d) of General License 3H authorizes all transactions related to, the provision of financing for, and other dealings in bonds that were issued both (i) prior to August 25, 2017 (the effective date of E.O. 13808), and (ii) by U.S. person entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela, other than PDV Holding, Inc., CITGO Holding, Inc., and any of their subsidiaries, that would be prohibited by E.O. 13808 or E.O. 13850, each as amended, or by E.O. 13884.&nbsp;

U.S. persons may continue to hold their interests in the GL 3H Bonds, but are subject to certain restrictions on the sale of those bonds in the secondary market.&nbsp; General License 3H does not generally authorize U.S. persons to purchase or acquire new interests in the GL 3H Bonds, and as a result, such purchases are prohibited absent authorization from OFAC.&nbsp; However, to the extent that divesting or transferring holdings in the GL 3H Bonds from U.S. persons to non-U.S. persons requires engaging in certain GL 3H Bond transactions, such as purchasing or settling purchases of holdings in the GL 3H Bonds, paragraph (a), as described in paragraph (e)(2) of General License 3H authorizes U.S. persons to engage in such transactions.&nbsp; Note: paragraph (a), as described in paragraph (e)(2), of General License 3H does not authorize U.S. persons to purchase or invest in bonds issued by the Government of Venezuela other than GL 3H Bonds.

While non-U.S. persons may continue to deal in the GL 3H Bonds, to the extent transactions involve U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system, such transactions must comply with the terms of General License 3H and may not involve sales of any interests in such bonds to U.S. persons (other than as set forth in GL 3H and as described above) as U.S. persons are largely prohibited from purchasing such interests. [05-12-2020]



Executive Order 13857 of January 25, 2019 “Taking Additional Steps to Address the National Emergency with Respect to Venezuela”.&nbsp;Please note that the FAQs in this section will be updated as appropriate to reflect the designation of PdVSA.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;


649.&nbsp;What does Executive Order 13857 of January 25, 2019 “Taking Additional Steps to Address the National Emergency with Respect to Venezuela” do and how does this impact OFAC’s Venezuela-related sanctions?&nbsp;&nbsp;

Executive Order 13857 of January 25, 2019 “Taking Additional Steps to Address the National Emergency with Respect to Venezuela”? broadens the definition of the term “Government of Venezuela” to include persons that have acted, or have purported to act, on behalf of the Government of Venezuela, including members of the Maduro regime, for purposes of Executive Orders 13692, 13808, 13827, 13835, and 13850.&nbsp; All existing Venezuela-related sanctions remain in effect. [01-28-2019]&nbsp;?





663.&nbsp;Does the Secretary of the Treasury’s determination on March 22, 2019, that persons operating in the financial sector of the Venezuelan economy may be subject to sanctions pursuant to Executive Order 13850, as amended, mean that all Venezuelan financial institutions have been sanctioned by OFAC as of March 22, 2019, and are now blocked persons?

No.&nbsp; Only those persons listed on OFAC’s SDN List, and entities that they own, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more of, are blocked persons and subject to sanctions pursuant to E.O. 13580, as amended.&nbsp;[03-22-2019]



664. Can U.S. financial institutions process transactions and maintain correspondent accounts in connection with activities authorized under Venezuela General Licenses 4A, 15, 16, 17, and 18?

U.S. financial institutions and U.S. registered money transmitters are authorized to process transactions involving Banco de Venezuela, S.A. Banco Universal (Banco de Venezuela) or Banco Bicentenario del Pueblo, de la Clase Obrera, Mujer y Comunas, Banco Universal C.A. (Banco Bicentenario del Pueblo) for purposes of Venezuela General Licenses 4A, 15, 16, and 17, Banco Prodem S.A. for purposes of General License 17, and Integracion Administradora de Fondos de Ahorro Previsional, S.A. for purposes of General License 18?, in each case so long as the underlying transaction or activity is authorized under the relevant general license.&nbsp;&nbsp;

U.S. financial institutions that maintain correspondent accounts for Banco de Venezuela or Banco Bicentenario del Pueblo for purposes of General Licenses 4A, 15, 16, and 17, Banco Prodem S.A. for purposes of General License 17, and Integracion Administradora de Fondos de Ahorro Previsional, S.A. for purposes of General License 18 may debit or credit such accounts for transactions consistent with the activity authorized in the relevant general license.&nbsp;[03-22-2019]




665. Will the designation of the Government of Venezuela restrict the ability of U.S. persons to support humanitarian efforts, including to engage in or facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance or non-commercial, personal remittances to Venezuela?

No. OFAC is committed to ensuring that humanitarian assistance and non-commercial, personal remittances can flow to the people of Venezuela. To that end, concurrent with the blocking of the Government of Venezuela, OFAC has issued amendments to current Venezuela-related general licenses and issued new general licenses to ensure that U.S. persons may continue to engage in and facilitate non-commercial, personal remittances, and the export or reexport of humanitarian items (agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, replacement parts and components for medical devices, and software updates for medical devices) to Venezuela. Likewise, E.O. of August 5, 2019 does not prohibit transactions involving the Government of Venezuela that relate to the provision of articles such as food, clothing, and medicine intended to be used to relieve human suffering. For additional information, please see FAQ 519 and OFAC’s “Guidance Related to the Provision of Humanitarian Assistance and Support to the Venezuelan People.” 

OFAC also issued amended General License 20A to authorize official activities of certain international organizations such as the United Nations (including its Programmes and Funds, and its Specialized Agencies and Related Organizations) and the International Committee of the Red Cross, among others, to engage in transactions involving Banco Central de Venezuela, or involving other Government of Venezuela persons to the extent the transactions are subject to U.S. jurisdiction.

Sanctions do not prohibit U.S. persons from engaging in exports or reexports of items to Venezuela, provided that the transactions do not involve sanctioned individuals or entities or certain prohibited activity. Those involved in exports or reexports to Venezuela, including exports or reexports related to activity authorized by OFAC, should also consult the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security &nbsp;to ensure eligibility of exportation or reexportation under its authorities.

If individuals, companies, or financial institutions have questions about engaging in or processing transactions related to these authorizations, they can contact OFAC’s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490. [08-06-2019]



672. Can I export or reexport diluents to Venezuela? 

No.&nbsp; Diluents (including, for example, crude oil and naphtha) play a key role in the transportation and exportation of Venezuelan petroleum, a primary source of revenue for the illegitimate and corrupt Maduro regime, which the United States seeks to restrict further.&nbsp; OFAC is amending General Licenses (GLs) 7A, 8, and 13&nbsp; effective as of June 6, 2019, to restrict U.S. persons engaging in transactions and activities authorized by those GLs from exporting or reexporting diluents, directly or indirectly, to Venezuela, or from engaging in transactions or activities related thereto.

&nbsp;

Absent authorization from OFAC, all U.S. persons continue to be prohibited from engaging in any dealings with Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA), or any entity in which PdVSA owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp; In addition, non-U.S. persons could be subject to designation pursuant to Executive Order 13850, as amended, for operating within the oil sector of the Venezuelan economy, or for having materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of PdVSA, including the exportation or reexportation of diluents to PdVSA.&nbsp;

&nbsp;

Given PdVSA’s role as Venezuela’s state-owned oil company, exports or reexports of diluents to Venezuela likely include a direct or indirect interest of PdVSA.&nbsp; As a result, persons directly or indirectly exporting or reexporting diluents to Venezuela should exercise enhanced due diligence to verify the ultimate end user and ensure that the transaction does not involve a direct or indirect interest of a sanctioned person, including PdVSA, even if the sanctioned person is not identified as a participant in the transaction. [06-06-2019]&nbsp;&nbsp;



679. Executive Order 13884 of August 5, 2019, “Blocking Property of the Government of Venezuela,” blocks all property and interests in property of the Government of Venezuela. What does this mean for the Government of the Interim President of Venezuela?


&nbsp;

The United States stands with the Venezuelan people and current Interim President of Venezuela Juan Gerardo Guaidó Marquez (“Guaidó”) in opposition to the illegitimate Maduro regime. On January 4, 2021, OFAC issued General License 31A authorizing transactions and activities involving the current Interim President of Venezuela, the IV Venezuela National Assembly seated on January 5, 2016 (“IV National Assembly”), and its Delegated Commission, including respective members and staff, that are otherwise prohibited by E.O. 13884. The authorization also covers transactions and activities prohibited by E.O. 13850, as amended, with respect to certain persons appointed by Guaidó, the IV National Assembly, and its Delegated Commission.

In addition, General License 31A authorizes transactions and activities involving any official, designee, or representative appointed or designated by Guaidó to act on behalf of the Government of Venezuela, including the Special Attorney General, and any staff of the foregoing individuals; any ambassador or other representative to the United States or to a third country appointed by Guaidó, and any staff of such ambassador or representative; any representative to an international organization appointed by Guaidó, and any staff of such representative; any person appointed by Guaidó to the board of directors (including any ad hoc board of directors) or appointed as an executive officer of a Government of Venezuela entity (including entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Venezuela); and any other person that is appointed or designated by any of the foregoing persons to act on behalf of the Government of Venezuela.

General License 31A replaced and superseded General License 31, dated August 5, 2019. [01-04-2021]

680.&nbsp;Does the blocking of the Government of Venezuela impact the ability of U.S. persons to transact with the Government of Venezuela, or persons in which the Government of Venezuela owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest?&nbsp;


&nbsp;

Yes. Unless exempt or authorized by OFAC, all property and interests in property of persons meeting the definition of the Government of Venezuela&nbsp; (see section 6(d) of E.O. 13884? of August 5, 2019) that are in, or come within, the United States or the possession or control of a United States person are blocked, pursuant to E.O. 13884.&nbsp; The term “Government of Venezuela,” as defined in E.O. 13884, includes the state and Government of Venezuela, any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including the Central Bank of Venezuela and Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA), any person owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the foregoing, and any person who has acted or purported to act directly or&nbsp;indirectly for or on behalf of, any of the foregoing, including as a member of the Maduro regime.


&nbsp;

OFAC has issued several General Licenses (GLs) that provide authorization for categories of persons blocked by E.O. 13884.&nbsp; GL 34A authorizes transactions with certain Government of Venezuela individuals, including United States citizens; permanent resident aliens of the United States; individuals who have a valid U.S. immigrant or nonimmigrant visa, other than individuals in the United States as part of Venezuela’s mission to the United Nations; former employees and contractors of the Government of Venezuela; and current employees and contractors of the Government of Venezuela who provide health or education services in Venezuela, including at hospitals, schools, and universities.&nbsp; In addition, GL 22 authorizes certain transactions related to Venezuela’s mission to the United Nations, and GL 31 provides authorization related to the Government of the Interim President of Venezuela.


&nbsp;

Without authorization from OFAC, U.S. persons are generally prohibited from engaging in transactions with the Government of Venezuela, or persons in which the Government of Venezuela owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest. U.S. persons are not prohibited from engaging in transactions involving the country or people of Venezuela, provided blocked persons or any conduct prohibited by any other Executive order imposing sanctions measures related to the situation in Venezuela, are not involved.


&nbsp;

Please note that persons meeting the definition of Government of Venezuela and persons that are owned, directly or indirectly, 50 percent or more by the Government of Venezuela are blocked pursuant to E.O. 13884, regardless of whether the person appears on the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons list (SDN List), unless exempt or authorized by OFAC.


&nbsp;

As a general matter, OFAC expects financial institutions to conduct due diligence on their own direct customers (including, for example, their ownership structure) to confirm that those customers are not persons whose property and interests in property are blocked.&nbsp; With regard to other types of transactions where a financial institution is acting solely as an intermediary and fails to block transactions involving a sanctions target, OFAC will consider the totality of the circumstances surrounding the bank’s processing of the transaction to determine what, if any, regulatory response is appropriate.&nbsp;?[11-05-2019]

681. Does General License 28 extend the authorization of wind-down periods that have expired for Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PdVSA), Banco Central de Venezuela (BCV), or other blocked Government of Venezuela persons?

&nbsp;

No.&nbsp;&nbsp;General License 28, “Authorizing Certain Activities Necessary to the Wind Down of Operations or Existing Contracts Involving the Government of Venezuela,” only authorizes dealings with persons blocked solely pursuant to E.O. of August 5, 2019; General License 28 does not authorize dealings with persons blocked under E.O.s 13692 or 13850, as amended, or any activities or transactions prohibited under E.O.s 13808, 13827, or 13835, each as amended. &nbsp;

General licenses authorizing wind-down periods for previously designated Government of Venezuela entities (e.g., General License 11 pertaining to PdVSA and General License 19 pertaining to BCV) have expired, and all transactions and activities with such designated persons should have been wound down by the expiration of the applicable general license, absent specific authorization from OFAC.&nbsp;

For clarity on the scope of each general license (including its expiration and the Executive orders or prohibitions the general license authorizes against), please refer to the header of each general license, relevant notes, and any specified expiration date. [08-06-2019]


803.&nbsp;What types of activity does General License 35 authorize?&nbsp;

U.S. persons are authorized to engage in certain administrative transactions with the Government of Venezuela that are prohibited by E.O. 13884 of August 5, 2019, where such transactions are necessary and ordinarily incident to such persons’ day-to-day operations.&nbsp; General License 35 authorizes U.S. persons to pay taxes, fees, and import duties to the Government of Venezuela, and to purchase or receive permits, licenses, registrations, certifications, and public utility services from the Government of Venezuela, so long as these transactions are necessary and ordinarily incident to such persons’ day-to-day operations.&nbsp;&nbsp;

U.S. persons should remain cautious when engaging in authorized activity with blocked persons to ensure all criteria for use of the general license are met.&nbsp; The illegitimate former Maduro regime has a long history of corruption, and we encourage U.S. persons who rely on the authorization in General License 35 to exercise appropriate due diligence to ensure compliance with the terms of the authorization.&nbsp; The U.S. government will continue to target corruption by the illegitimate former Maduro regime.&nbsp; As with any general or specific license, OFAC is prepared to revoke this authorization if appropriate to support U.S. foreign policy and national security priorities.&nbsp;[11-05-2019]



808. Do I need a specific license from OFAC to file a suit in U.S. court against a person designated or blocked pursuant to Venezuela-related sanctions? Does a U.S. court, or its personnel, need a specific license from OFAC to hear such a case?

No. A specific license from OFAC is not ordinarily required to initiate or continue U.S. legal proceedings against a person designated or blocked pursuant to OFAC’s Venezuela sanctions program, or for a U.S. court, or its personnel, to hear such a case. However, a specific license from OFAC is required for the entry into a settlement agreement or the enforcement of any lien, judgment, or other order through execution, garnishment, or other judicial process purporting to transfer or otherwise alter or affect property or interests in property blocked pursuant to the Venezuela Sanctions Regulations (31 C.F.R. Part 591). This includes the purported creation or perfection of any legal or equitable interests (including contingent or inchoate interests) in blocked property. While terminology may vary in different jurisdictions and proceedings, a specific license from OFAC would be required for measures such as:

• Taking Possession (Actual or Constructive)

• Seizing

• Levying Upon

• Attaching&nbsp;

• Encumbering&nbsp;

• Pledging

• Conveying

• Selling (Final or Contingent)

• Freezing&nbsp;

• Assuming or Maintaining Custody

• Sequestering


For additional information, see 31 C.F.R. §§ 591.309, 591.310, 591.407 and 591.506. [12-09-2019]



809.&nbsp;I hold a writ of attachment on shares of a Government of Venezuela entity whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the Venezuela Sanctions Regulations. Am I authorized to prepare for and hold an auction or other sale of the shares, contingent upon the winning bidder obtaining a license from OFAC? ?

No. Parties who have attached shares of an entity whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to the Venezuela Sanctions Regulations (31 C.F.R. Part 591) must obtain a specific license from OFAC prior to conducting an auction or other sale, including a contingent auction or other sale, or taking other concrete steps in furtherance of an auction or sale. More generally, OFAC urges caution in proceeding with any step in furtherance of measures which might alter or affect blocked property or interests in blocked property. OFAC would consider license applications seeking to authorize such activities on a case-by-case basis. For additional information, see 31 C.F.R. §§ 591.309, 591.310, 591.407 and 591.506.&nbsp;?[12-09-2019]



817. What is the significance of OFAC’s&nbsp;designations of Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A.? Do the E.O. 13850 blocking sanctions on Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A. apply to their corporate parent and their affiliates?

On February 18, 2020, OFAC designated Rosneft Trading S.A. pursuant to E.O. 13850 for operating in the oil sector of the Venezuelan economy.&nbsp; Likewise, on March 12, 2020, OFAC designated TNK Trading International S.A. pursuant to E.O. 13850 for operating in the oil sector of the Venezuelan economy.&nbsp;&nbsp;

General License 36A&nbsp;authorizes U.S. persons to engage in certain activities prohibited by E.O. 13850 necessary for the wind down of transactions involving Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A., or any entity in which Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 20, 2020.&nbsp; After the expiration of this authorization, unless exempt or authorized by OFAC, U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in transactions with Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A., or any entity in which Rosneft Trading, S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, and must block property or interests in property of Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A. that are in, or come within, the United States, or the possession or control of a U.S. person.&nbsp; As Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A. are also identified on the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List (SSI List) pursuant to Directives 2 and 4 to E.O. 13662 under the Ukraine-/Russia-related sanctions program, those winding down transactions with Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. should ensure that all activities comply with any applicable Directive 2 and 4 prohibitions, because General License 36A only authorizes certain activities necessary to the wind down of transactions prohibited by E.O. 13850.

The E.O. 13850 blocking sanctions apply only to Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A., or any entity in which Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A.&nbsp; owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.&nbsp; Blocking sanctions do not apply to these entities’ ultimate parent, Rosneft Oil Company.&nbsp; Similarly, blocking sanctions do not apply to Rosneft Oil Company or other subsidiaries or affiliates, provided that such entities are not owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons or otherwise explicitly designated or identified by OFAC.

U.S. persons, therefore, are not prohibited under E.O. 13850 from dealing with Rosneft Oil Company, its non-blocked subsidiaries, or non-blocked affiliates to the extent the proposed dealings do not involve any blocked persons or any other activities prohibited pursuant to any OFAC sanctions authorities.&nbsp; As Rosneft Oil Company, Rosneft Trading S.A., and TNK Trading International S.A. have been listed on the SSI List since July 2014, July 2015, and March 2020 respectively, they are subject to Ukraine-/Russia-related Directives 2 and 4.&nbsp; U.S. persons should be mindful of the relevant Ukraine-/Russia-related prohibitions that would be applicable as a result of dealings with both Rosneft Oil Company, Rosneft Trading S.A., and TNK Trading International S.A.&nbsp; See, generally,&nbsp;FAQs&nbsp;370-373, 391-396, 405-410, 412-421, and 536-538 for prohibitions on U.S. persons dealing with entities listed on the SSI List.&nbsp; See also&nbsp;FAQs 398 and 400 for information regarding dealings with blocked persons representing non-blocked entities.&nbsp;&nbsp;[03-12-2020]



818. Is there a wind-down period for transactions involving Rosneft Trading S.A.&nbsp;or TNK Trading International S.A.?

OFAC issued General License&nbsp;(GL)&nbsp;36A, which authorizes U.S. persons to engage in certain activities prohibited by E.O. 13850? necessary for the wind down of transactions involving Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A., or any entity in which Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A., owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 20, 2020 (a prior version of this GL, GL 36, was issued concurrently with the designation of Rosneft Trading S.A. and authorized certain wind-down activities as well).&nbsp; After the expiration of this authorization, unless exempt or authorized by OFAC, U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in transactions with Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A., or any entity in which Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, and must block property or interests in property of Rosneft Trading S.A. and TNK Trading International S.A. that are in, or come within, the United States, or the possession or control of a U.S. person.

Non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions with Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13850, provided that such wind-down activity is:&nbsp; (i) consistent with General License 36A; and (ii) completed prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 20, 2020.&nbsp; Entering into new business involving Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. will not be considered wind-down activity.&nbsp; Non-U.S. persons unable to wind down activities with Rosneft Trading S.A. or TNK Trading International S.A. before 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 20, 2020, may seek guidance from OFAC.&nbsp;&nbsp;[03-12-2020]&nbsp;


834.&nbsp;What does General License 37 authorize?

On June 18, 2020, OFAC designated&nbsp;pursuant to E.O. 13850,&nbsp;among other entities and individuals, two entities for operating in the oil sector of the Venezuelan economy and identified two vessels owned by these entities as blocked property. Concurrent with this action, OFAC issued General License (GL) 37?, which authorizes U.S. persons to engage in transactions and activities prohibited by E.O. 13850, as amended by E.O. 13857? and incorporated into the Venezuela Sanctions Regulations, that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of transactions involving the blocked persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37 through 12:01 am eastern daylight time, July 21, 2020.

The wind-down authorization in GL 37 includes, for example, completion of ongoing voyages, including discharge of cargo aboard such vessels as of June 18, 2020; docking or anchoring of the vessels at third-country, non-sanctioned ports; transactions related to the safety and maintenance of the vessels, such as entering into contracts and paying for insurance coverage, flagging, and safety and compliance inspections; and transactions related to the health and safety of any crew, including the provision and processing of wages or other employee benefits, or other provision of crewing services.

After the expiration of this authorization&nbsp;U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in all transactions with the persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37&nbsp;that are not exempt or authorized by OFAC.&nbsp;U.S. persons unable to wind down transactions with the persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37 before 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, July 21, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC.

Non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions with the persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37 without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13850, provided that such wind-down activity is consistent with GL 37. Entering into new contracts involving the persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37 is not authorized under GL 37, unless such contracts are for wind-down activity authorized in paragraph (a). Non-U.S. persons unable to wind down transactions with the persons or vessels listed in paragraph (b) of GL 37 before 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, July 21, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC. [06-18-2020]


854. What does General License 38 authorize?


On November 30, 2020, OFAC designated CEIEC pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13692 for its role in undermining democracy in Venezuela. Concurrent with this action, OFAC issued Venezuela General License (GL) 38 (“Authorizing the Wind Down of Transactions Involving CEIEC”). GL 38 authorizes U.S. persons to engage in all transactions and activities prohibited by E.O. 13692 that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of transactions and activities involving CEIEC, or any entity in which CEIEC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest (collectively, Blocked CEIEC Entities), through 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, January 14 , 2021.

After the expiration of this authorization, unless exempt or authorized by OFAC, U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in transactions with the Blocked CEIEC Entities, and must block property or interests in property of such entities that are in, or come within, the United States, or the possession or control of a U.S. person.

Non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions and activities with the Blocked CEIEC Entities without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13692, provided that such wind-down activity is: (i) consistent with GL 38; and (ii) completed prior to 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, January 14, 2021. Entering into new business involving the Blocked CEIEC Entities will not be considered wind-down activity. Non-U.S. persons unable to wind down activities with the Blocked CEIEC Entities before 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, January 14, 2021, may seek guidance from OFAC.


&nbsp;



Counter Terrorism Sanctions


812. As a U.S. person, am I prohibited from engaging in transactions involving information or informational materials, including artwork, that are the property or subject to an interest in property of persons designated as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) under or otherwise blocked pursuant to Executive Order 13224, as amended, (E.O. 13224)? 

Yes. In general, any transaction or dealing by a U.S. person in any property or interests in property of persons designated as SDGTs under or otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224 is prohibited. Such property includes artwork and other information and information materials. Certain exemptions available under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) relating to personal communications, humanitarian donations, information or informational materials, and travel do not apply to transactions with SDGTs or persons otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224.

For purposes of these prohibitions, U.S. persons include all U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens regardless of where they are located, all persons and entities within the United States, and all U.S.-incorporated entities and their foreign branches. U.S. persons who engage in prohibited transactions with SDGTs or with persons otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224 may be subject to civil or criminal penalties.

Non-U.S. persons who engage in prohibited transactions or dealings subject to U.S. jurisdiction with SDGTs or with persons otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224 may be subject to civil or criminal penalties, and may also risk being sanctioned by OFAC. Foreign financial institutions may also be subject to correspondent and payable through account sanctions if they knowingly facilitate significant transactions for or on behalf of an SDGT. [12-13-2019]



813. As a member of the art community, what are my compliance obligations with respect to Executive Order 13224, as amended? 

U.S. persons (including galleries, museums, private art collectors, auction companies, and others that conduct or facilitate transactions involving artwork) must ensure that they do not engage in transactions with persons listed as Specially Designated Global Terrorists (SDGTs) on OFAC’s SDN List or with persons otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224, unless authorized by OFAC. U.S. persons should develop a tailored, risk-based compliance program, which may include sanctions list screening or other appropriate measures. An adequate compliance solution will depend on a variety of factors, including the type of business involved, and there is no single compliance program or solution suitable for every circumstance.

For purposes of these requirements, U.S. persons include all U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens regardless of where they are located, all persons and entities within the United States, and all U.S.-incorporated entities and their foreign branches. U.S. persons who engage in prohibited transactions may be subject to civil or criminal penalties.

Non-U.S. persons who engage in prohibited transactions subject to U.S. jurisdiction with SDGTs or persons otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224 may be subject to civil or criminal penalties, and also risk being sanctioned by OFAC. Foreign financial institutions may be subject to correspondent and payable through account sanctions if they knowingly facilitate significant transactions for or on behalf of a SDGT.

The names of, and identifying information for, all individuals and entities included on OFAC’s sanctions lists may be located via OFAC’s free, online search engine at the following URL: http://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov. In addition, OFAC offers text and PDF versions of these lists for manual review and a number of data file versions of its lists that are designed to facilitate automated screening. Depending on the scale, sophistication, and risk profile of your business, you may consider one of the numerous commercially available screening software packages. [12-13-2019]



814. I am currently in possession of artwork in which a Specially Designated Global Terrorist (SDGT) has an interest. What should I do?

Once it has been determined that you or your institution is holding or is in possession of artwork that is the property of an SDGT or a person otherwise blocked pursuant to E.O. 13224, or in which such a person has an interest, you or your institution must ensure that access to that artwork is denied to the SDGT or blocked person and that your institution complies with OFAC regulations related to blocked assets, including restrictions on the sale or transfer of the artwork to third parties. Pursuant to 31 CFR section 501.603, blocked property, physical or financial, must be reported to OFAC within 10 business days; U.S. persons must also comply with all other applicable reporting obligations. See FAQs 49 and 50. Questions about whether a transaction should be blocked should be directed to OFAC at 202-622-2490 or ofac_feedback@treasury.gov. [12-13-2019]



875. Are U.S. persons prohibited from supporting humanitarian efforts in Yemen, including by engaging in or facilitating the provision of humanitarian assistance to Yemen, if those efforts involve Ansarallah? 

Ansarallah was designated on January 19, 2021 as a Foreign Terrorist Organization under section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, and as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist under Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended. These sanctions do not prohibit U.S. persons from exporting or reexporting goods or services to Yemen, provided that the transactions do not involve sanctioned individuals or entities, or property in which a blocked person has an interest unless exempt from regulation or authorized by OFAC.

Concurrent with the designation of Ansarallah, OFAC issued four General Licenses (GLs) to facilitate the uninterrupted flow of humanitarian assistance and certain other critical commodities to the people of Yemen. These GLs, issued under the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594 (GTSR), the Foreign Terrorist Organizations Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 597 (FTOSR), and E.O. 13224, as amended, authorize certain humanitarian and other activities that involve Ansarallah, or any entity in which Ansarallah owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, and that are prohibited by the GTSR, the FTOSR, or E.O. 13224. Specifically, OFAC issued GL 12, which authorizes certain transactions related to the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, replacement parts and components for medical devices, or software updates for medical devices to Yemen, or to persons in third countries purchasing specifically for resale to Yemen. OFAC also issued GL 11, which authorizes certain activities by nongovernmental organizations to support humanitarian projects, democracy building, education, non-commercial development projects, and environmental protection in Yemen. GLs 11 and 12 also authorize all transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the activities authorized by these GLs, including but not limited to the processing and transfer of funds, payment of taxes, fees, and import duties, and purchase or receipt of permits, licenses, or public utility services.

Furthermore, OFAC issued GLs 9 and 10, respectively, to authorize the official activities of the U.S. government and certain international organizations, such as the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross, to the extent the transactions are subject to U.S. jurisdiction.

In addition to these GLs, OFAC may also issue specific licenses to authorize certain transactions involving U.S. persons or the U.S. financial system that may otherwise be prohibited by OFAC sanctions, provided those transactions are in the foreign policy interests of the United States.

If individuals, companies, or financial institutions have questions about engaging in or processing transactions related to these authorizations, they can contact OFAC’s Sanctions Compliance and Evaluation Division at (800) 540-6322 or (202) 622-2490. [01-19-2021]



876. Do non-U.S. persons risk exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13224, as amended, for engaging in transactions involving Ansarallah, or any entity in which Ansarallah owns a 50 percent or greater interest, that U.S. persons would be authorized to engage in under General Licenses 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13? 

Non-U.S. persons may engage in or facilitate transactions involving Ansarallah, or any entity in which Ansarallah owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest, without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13224, as amended, if such activity would be authorized under General Licenses (GLs) 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 if engaged in by a U.S. person. Activity that would be authorized by GLs 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 if engaged in by a U.S. person would not be considered “significant” for the purposes of a secondary sanctions determination under E.O. 13224, as amended.

Accordingly, foreign financial institutions do not risk exposure to correspondent and payable-through account sanctions under E.O. 13224, as amended, if they knowingly conduct or facilitate a transaction on behalf of Ansarallah, or any entity in which Ansarallah owns, a 50 percent or greater interest, that would be authorized under GLs 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 if engaged in by a U.S. person. [01-25-2021]



877. Can U.S. and non-U.S. persons provide humanitarian assistance in response to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Yemen following the designation of Ansarallah? 

Yes. U.S. persons may continue to provide humanitarian goods or assistance to the Yemeni people in response to the COVID-19 outbreak in Yemen, consistent with U.S. sanctions. With respect to certain activities that may result in transactions with or that provide benefits to Ansarallah, or an entity in which Ansarallah owns a 50 percent or greater interest, OFAC issued General Licenses (GLs) 9, 10, 11, and 12 under the Global Terrorism Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 594 (GTSR), the Foreign Terrorist Organizations Sanctions Regulations, 31 C.F.R. part 597 (FTOSR), and Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, as amended, authorizing the provision of certain goods and assistance by the U.S. government, international organizations, non-governmental organizations, and individuals and entities delivering food, medicine, medical supplies, and humanitarian assistance to Yemen.

Pursuant to GL 12, U.S. persons may engage in all transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the exportation or reexportation of agricultural commodities, medicine, medical devices, replacement parts and components for medical devices, or software updates for medical devices to Yemen, or to persons in third countries purchasing specifically for resale to Yemen that involve the Ansarallah, or any entity in which Ansarallah owns a 50 percent or greater interest, subject to certain conditions. GL 12’s authorizations extend to the exportation or reexportation of items that may be used in the fight against COVID-19, including personal protective equipment and other items such as medical gowns, medical eye shields and goggles, surgical gloves, face shields, respirators and masks such as N95, N99, and N100 masks, oxygen generators, full face mask respirators including Powered Air Purifying Respirators, diagnostic medical imaging equipment, decontamination equipment, and ventilators.

For more information on what GLs 9, 10, 11, and 12 authorize, and non-U.S. persons’ exposure to sanctions for engaging in activity authorized by GLs 9, 10, 11, and 12, see FAQs 875 and 876. [01-19-2021]





Nicaragua-related Sanctions


827. What does Nicaragua-related General License (GL) 2 authorize with respect to the Nicaraguan National Police?

GL 2 authorizes the wind down of transactions involving the Nicaraguan National Police (NNP), including the processing of salary payments from the NNP to its employees, so long as no other blocked persons are involved in the transaction, through 12:01 a.m. eastern daylight time, May 6, 2020. This authorization also covers wind down transactions involving any entity in which NNP owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest.

OFAC’s designation of the NNP is directed at the NNP as an institution for the violent abuses carried out against the people of Nicaragua. The blocking sanctions apply to the NNP, as well as to the three named NNP commissioners who were designated on the same day, and not to individual, non-designated NNP police officers. [03-05-2020]





Global Magnitsky Sanctions


835. What does Global Magnitsky General License 2A authorize?

On July 31, 2020, OFAC designated, pursuant to E.O. 13818, the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps (XPCC) for its connection to serious human rights abuse in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (XUAR). Concurrent with this action, OFAC issued Global Magnitsky General License (GL) 2. GL 2 was replaced and superseded by Global Magnitksy General License 2A on September 25, 2020. GL 2A does not authorize any transactions involving the XPCC itself; however, GL 2A does authorize, subject to certain conditions, U.S. persons to engage in transactions and activities prohibited by the Global Magnitsky Sanctions Regulations (GSMR) that are ordinarily incident and necessary to the wind down of transactions involving any entity in which the XPCC owns, directly or indirectly, a 50 percent or greater interest (Blocked XPCC Subsidiary), through 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, November 30, 2020.

GL 2A also authorizes, subject to certain conditions, transactions and activities that are ordinarily incident and necessary to (1) divest or transfer debt, equity, or other holdings of any Blocked XPCC Subsidiary to a non-U.S. person, or (2) facilitate the transfer of debt, equity, or other holdings in any Blocked XPCC Subsidiary by a non-U.S. person to another non-U.S. person, through 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, November 30, 2020. GL 2 does not authorize divestment activities involving the XPCC itself, nor does it authorize U.S. persons to sell to, purchase or invest in, or facilitate such transactions with any blocked person — including Blocked XPCC Subsidiaries, except for such purchases of or investments in Blocked XPCC Subsidiaries that are ordinarily incident and necessary to effectuate authorized divestment transactions. Further, GL 2A does not authorize any debit to the account of any Blocked XPCC Subsidiary on the books of a U.S. financial institution.

After the expiration of this general authorization, U.S. persons will be prohibited from engaging in or facilitating transactions with Blocked XPCC Subsidiaries unless exempt or authorized by OFAC. U.S. persons unable to wind down transactions with, or divest from, any Blocked XPCC Subsidiary before 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, November 30, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC.

Non-U.S. persons may wind down transactions with, or divest from, a Blocked XPCC Subsidiary without exposure to sanctions under E.O. 13818, provided that such wind-down activity is consistent with GL 2A. Wind-down transactions involving non-U.S. persons may be processed through the U.S. financial system or involve U.S. persons as long as the transactions comply with the terms and conditions in GL 2A. Non-U.S. persons unable to wind down transactions with, or divest from, a Blocked XPCC Subsidiary before 12:01 a.m. eastern standard time, November 30, 2020, are encouraged to seek guidance from OFAC.

The unblocking of any property blocked pursuant to any other part of 31 C.F.R. chapter V is not authorized under GL 2A. [09-25-2020]



Hong Kong-related Sanctions


840. If an official of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR) is designated as a Specially Designated National (SDN), does that mean that the HKSAR government is blocked? What are the prohibitions on U.S. persons dealing with a designated HKSAR government official?

The designation of an official of the Government of the HKSAR does not itself block the HKSAR government or any government agency where the SDN is an official or otherwise exercises control. Accordingly, engaging in a routine interaction with an agency in which an SDN is an official, but which does not involve the SDN directly or indirectly, is not prohibited.

U.S. persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions or dealings with, and dealing in the property or interests in property of, designated HKSAR government officials, including any entities that are directly or indirectly owned 50 percent or more in the aggregate by one or more blocked persons. U.S. persons should be cautious in dealings with HKSAR government agencies in which an SDN is an official to ensure that they are not engaged in transactions or dealings, directly or indirectly, with an SDN (e.g., by entering into contracts that are signed by an SDN, entering into negotiations with an SDN, or processing transactions, directly or indirectly, on behalf of the SDN), absent authorization from OFAC or an applicable exemption. However, U.S. persons may, for example, enter into HKSAR government contracts signed by a non-SDN official of the HKSAR to whom the HKSAR government has delegated the authority to enter such contracts. [09-25-2020]



848. What are the sanctions implications of the Secretary of State’s October 14, 2020 report to Congress pursuant to section 5(a) of the Hong Kong Autonomy Act (HKAA), and subsequent updates of this report, identifying foreign persons that are materially contributing to, have materially contributed to, or attempt to materially contribute to the failure of the Government of China to meet its obligations under the Joint Declaration or the Basic Law?

Pursuant to section 5(a) of the HKAA, the Secretary of State submitted a report (“Section 5(a) Report”) on October 14, 2020 to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership identifying foreign persons that the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, determined are materially contributing to, have materially contributed to, or attempt to materially contribute to the failure of the Government of China to meet its obligations under the Joint Declaration or the Basic Law. &nbsp;

Section 6 of the HKAA requires blocking sanctions to be imposed on each foreign person identified in the Section 5(a) Report, or in an update to that report under section 5(e) of the HKAA. &nbsp;The individuals identified in the October 14, 2020 Section 5(a) Report were designated by OFAC on August 7, 2020 pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 13936, and the property and interests in property of those individuals that are in the United States or in the possession or control of U.S. persons are blocked.

Further, section 5(b) of the HKAA requires the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to submit a report to Congress 30–60 days after the Section 5(a) Report is submitted, identifying any foreign financial institution (FFI) that knowingly conducts a significant transaction with a foreign person identified in the Section 5(a) Report. &nbsp;For the purposes of the report under section 5(b) (“Section 5(b) Report”), the Treasury Department will only identify FFIs that knowingly conduct a significant transaction with a foreign person identified in the Section 5(a) Report or any update to that report following the person’s listing in the Section 5(a) Report. &nbsp;As a general matter, transactions with persons identified in the Section 5(a) Report that constitute a good-faith wind down within 30 days of a person’s identification on such report will not be considered “significant” for purposes of the Section 5(b) Report. &nbsp;In addition, the Treasury Department will reach out to an FFI to inquire about its conduct before identifying it in a Section 5(b) Report.

Pursuant to section 7(a) of the HKAA, within one year of an FFI’s inclusion in the Section 5(b) Report, five out of 10 of the sanctions set out in section 7(b) of the HKAA must be imposed on that FFI. &nbsp;Not later than two years after an FFI has been included in the Section 5(b) Report, all 10 sanctions set out in section 7(b) must be imposed on that FFI. &nbsp;

Any FFI that knowingly conducts a significant transaction with a foreign person named in the Section 5(a) Report or an update to that report is potentially subject to mandatory secondary sanctions under the HKAA. &nbsp;Accordingly, with respect to foreign persons in the Section 5(a) Report that also appear on the List of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List), OFAC has updated the SDN List to include the language, “Secondary sanctions risk: pursuant to the Hong Kong Autonomy Act of 2020 – Public Law 116–149.” [10-14-2020]



849. Can a foreign financial institution (FFI) be excluded or removed from the Section 5(b) Report so that sanctions under the Hong Kong Autonomy Act (HKAA) would not apply?

Pursuant to section 5(d)(2) of the HKAA, an FFI may be excluded from the Section 5(b) Report or an update to that report under section 5(e) of the HKAA, or may be removed from the Section 5(b) Report or an update to that report prior to the imposition of sanctions under section 7(a), if the significant transaction or transactions of the FFI that merited inclusion in that report: &nbsp;(A) does not have a significant and lasting negative effect that contravenes the obligations of China under the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law; (B) is not likely to be repeated in the future; and (C) has been reversed or otherwise mitigated through positive countermeasures taken by that FFI. [10-14-2020]



850. How does the Treasury Department determine whether a transaction is “significant” for purposes of section 5(b) of the Hong Kong Autonomy Act (HKAA)?

For purposes of implementing section 5(b) of the HKAA, the Secretary of the Treasury may consider the totality of the facts and circumstances when determining whether transactions are “significant.” &nbsp;As a general matter, the Treasury Department may consider some or all of the following factors in determining whether a transaction is “significant”: &nbsp;(1) the size, number, and frequency of the transaction(s); (2) the nature of the transaction(s); (3) the level of awareness of management and whether the transaction(s) are part of a pattern of conduct; (4) the nexus between the transaction(s) and a foreign person identified in a report submitted by the Secretary of State under section 5(a) of the HKAA or in updates to that report; (5) the impact of the transaction(s) on statutory objectives, including whether the transaction(s) (A) have a significant and lasting negative effect that contravenes the obligations of China under the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, (B) are likely to be repeated in the future, and (C) have been reversed or otherwise mitigated through positive countermeasures taken by that FFI; (6) whether the transaction(s) involve deceptive practices; and (7) such other factors that the Secretary of the Treasury deems relevant on a case-by-case basis. &nbsp;For purposes of section 5(b) of HKAA, a transaction will not be considered significant if a U.S. person would not require a specific license from OFAC to conduct or participate in the transaction. [10-14-2020]



851. How will the following key terms in section 5(b) of the Hong Kong Autonomy Act (HKAA) be defined: &nbsp;“financial institution” and “knowingly”?&nbsp;
Section 2 of HKAA defines these terms as follows, which OFAC intends to incorporate into relevant regulations:

“financial institution” – the term “financial institution” is defined to have the same meaning as a financial institution specified in section 5312(a)(2) of title 31, United States Code. &nbsp;

“knowingly” – the term “knowingly”, with respect to conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has actual knowledge of the conduct, the circumstance, or the result. [10-14-2020]


Chinese Military Companies Sanctions


857. Do the prohibitions in Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, apply to purchases or sales of publicly traded securities of subsidiaries of entities listed on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”)&nbsp;

The prohibitions in E.O. 13959, as amended, apply to a subsidiary of a Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Company (CMIC) listed on the NS-CMIC List only if such subsidiary itself is publicly listed on the NS-CMIC List by Treasury pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended, or identified in the Annex of E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;OFAC’s 50 percent rule does not apply to entities listed solely pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;Accordingly, the prohibitions on any subsidiaries listed on the NS-CMIC List would go into effect beginning 12:01 a.m. eastern time on the date that is 60 days after such subsidiary is added to the NS-CMIC List.&nbsp;[06/03/2021]



859.&nbsp;What are “publicly traded securities” for purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended?&nbsp;

For purposes of E.O. 13959, as amended, the term “publicly traded securities” includes any “security,” as defined in section 3(a)(10) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Public Law 73–291 (as codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(10)), denominated in any currency that trades on a securities exchange or through the method of trading that is commonly referred to as “over-the-counter,” in any jurisdiction.&nbsp;[06/03/2021]



860. For purposes of Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, what financial instruments are covered by the provision stating the prohibitions apply to “any publicly traded securities that are derivative of such securities or are designed to provide investment exposure to such” publicly traded securities?&nbsp;

Examples of financial instruments covered by this provision include, but are not limited to, derivatives (e.g., futures, options, swaps), warrants, American depositary receipts (ADRs), global depositary receipts (GDRs), exchange-traded funds (ETFs), index funds, and mutual funds, to the extent such instruments also meet the definition of &quot;publicly traded security&quot;&nbsp;as defined in section 3(c) of E.O. 13959, as amended. [06/03/2021]



861. Does Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, prohibit U.S. persons from investing in U.S. or foreign funds, such as exchange-traded funds (ETFs) or other mutual funds, that hold publicly traded securities of a Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Company (CMIC)?

Yes. &nbsp;Under E.O. 13959, as amended, any purchase or sale of publicly traded securities, or any publicly traded securities that are derivative of such securities or are designed to provide investment exposure to such securities, of any CMIC listed on the NS-CMIC List is prohibited, regardless of such securities'&nbsp;share of the underlying index fund, ETF, or derivative thereof. [06/03/2021]



863. Can U.S. persons custody, offer for sale, serve as a transfer agent, and trade in covered securities?&nbsp;

For purposes of E.O. 13959, as amended, activity by U.S. persons related to the following services are considered permissible, to the extent that such support services are not provided to U.S. persons in connection with prohibited purchases or sales:&nbsp;clearing, execution, settlement, custody, transfer agency, back-end services, as well as other such support services. [06/03/2021]



865. May market intermediaries and other participants facilitate divestment from publicly traded securities of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies (CMICs), including divestment by investment fund managers?

Yes. &nbsp;Market intermediaries, including market makers, and other participants may engage in ancillary or intermediary activities that are necessary to effect divestiture during the relevant wind-down periods or that are not otherwise prohibited under E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;Purchases or sales by U.S. persons (including investors and intermediaries) involving investment funds that are seeking to divest during the relevant wind-down periods are permitted. &nbsp;See FAQ 901&nbsp;with respect to the due diligence expectations associated with determining whether a particular purchase or sale is permissible. [06/03/2021]



871. What are the compliance obligations of securities exchanges operated by U.S. persons with respect to Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended?

Consistent with FAQ 865, which clarifies that market intermediaries and other participants may engage in ancillary or intermediary activities that are necessary to effect divestiture during the relevant wind-down periods or that are not otherwise prohibited under E.O. 13959, as amended, transactions and activities by securities exchanges operated by U.S. persons involving the purchase or sale of publicly traded securities (or any publicly traded securities that are derivative of such securities or are designed to provide investment exposure to such securities) of any entity listed on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”) are not prohibited. [06/03/2021]



898.&nbsp;What is the effect of Executive Order (E.O.) of June 3, 2021, “Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies of the People's Republic of China”?

E.O. of June 3, 2021 amends E.O. 13959 by replacing Sections 1 through 5 of E.O. 13959, as amended, and revokes E.O. 13974. &nbsp;In particular, E.O. of June 3, 2021 amends E.O. 13959 to prohibit the purchase or sale by U.S. persons of any publicly traded securities, or any publicly traded securities that are derivative of such securities or are designed to provide investment exposure to such securities, of any person listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended by E.O. of June 3, 2021, or of any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, and, as appropriate, the Secretary of Defense:

(i) to operate or have operated in the defense and related materiel sector or the surveillance technology sector of the economy of the People’s Republic of China; or
	(ii) to own or control, or to be owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, a person who operates or has operated in any sector described in clause (i) above, or a person who is listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended by E.O. of June 3, 2021, or who has otherwise been determined to be subject to the prohibitions in Section 1(a) of E.O. 13959, as amended by E.O. of June 3, 2021.
To implement E.O. of June 3, 2021, OFAC has published a list on its website containing the names of entities identified in or pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended by E.O. of June 3, 2021, titled the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”). &nbsp;In addition, OFAC is removing and replacing all previously issued Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) related to E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;OFAC will refer to E.O. 13959 as amended by E.O. of June 3, 2021 as “E.O. 13959, as amended.” [06/03/2021]

899.&nbsp;What entities are subject to Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, and when do the prohibitions against such entities go into effect? &nbsp;

OFAC has published a list on its website containing the names of entities that are subject to the prohibitions of E.O. 13959, as amended, as the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”), along with additional identifying information where possible. &nbsp;Effective June 3, 2021, the NS-CMIC List replaced and superseded in its entirety the Non-SDN Communist Chinese Military Companies List (NS-CCMC List), which has been deleted from OFAC’s website. &nbsp;Only entities whose names exactly match the names of the entities on the NS-CMIC List are subject to the prohibitions in E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;OFAC will refer to entities listed on the NS-CMIC List as “Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies” or “CMICs.”

For any entity listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, the prohibitions go into effect beginning at 12:01 a.m. eastern time on August 2, 2021. &nbsp;For any entity not listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, the prohibitions go into effect beginning at 12:01 a.m. eastern time on the date that is 60 days after the date the entity is listed on the NS-CMIC List.

Purchases or sales of publicly traded securities of CMICs listed in or pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended, made solely to divest, in whole or in part, such securities by a U.S. person are permitted until 12:01 a.m. eastern time on the date that is 365 days after the date the entity is listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, or added to the NS-CMIC List.&nbsp;[06/03/2021]
900.&nbsp;Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, authorizes the imposition of certain sanctions on persons who operate or have operated in the surveillance technology sector of the economy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC). &nbsp;For the purposes of E.O. 13959, as amended, how will OFAC target those who operate or have operated in this sector? &nbsp;

Pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended, OFAC expects to use its discretion to target, in particular, persons whose operations include or support, or have included or supported, (1) surveillance of persons by Chinese technology companies that occurs outside of the PRC; or (2) the development, marketing, sale, or export of Chinese surveillance technology that is, was, or can be used for surveillance of religious or ethnic minorities or to otherwise facilitate repression or serious human rights abuse. [06/03/2021]

901.&nbsp;Under Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, what level of due diligence must U.S. persons, including market intermediaries and other participants, undertake to assess whether an underlying purchase or sale is prohibited under E.O. 13959, as amended?&nbsp;

For purposes of assessing whether certain purchases or sales are permissible under E.O. 13959, as amended, U.S. persons — including financial institutions, registered broker-dealers in securities, securities exchanges, and other market intermediaries and participants — may rely upon the information available to them in the ordinary course of business.&nbsp;[06-03-2021]
902.&nbsp;Under Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, are U.S. persons prohibited from providing investment advisory, investment management, or similar services to a non-U.S. person, including a foreign entity or foreign fund, in connection with the non-U.S. person’s purchase or sale of covered securities of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies (CMICs)? &nbsp; &nbsp;

U.S. persons are not prohibited from providing investment advisory, investment management, or similar services to a non-U.S. person, including a foreign entity or foreign fund, in connection with the non-U.S. person’s purchase or sale of a covered security, provided that the underlying purchase or sale would not otherwise violate E.O. 13959, as amended. &nbsp;For example, a U.S. individual acting as the fund manager for a non-U.S. investment fund, or a U.S. entity that is the investment adviser or investment manager for a non-U.S. investment fund, is not prohibited from advising on, authorizing, directing, or approving purchases or sales of covered securities by the non-U.S. investment fund, provided that the underlying purchase or sale would not otherwise violate E.O. 13959, as amended (e.g., neither the purchase nor sale of the covered security is for the ultimate benefit of a U.S. person, the purchase or sale is not a willful attempt to evade the prohibitions of E.O. 13959, as amended, etc.). &nbsp;See FAQ 901&nbsp;with respect to the due diligence expectations associated with determining whether a particular purchase or sale is permissible. &nbsp;[06-03-2021]

903.&nbsp;Do the prohibitions of Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, apply to U.S. persons who are employed by non-U.S. entities and who, in the ordinary course of their employment, are involved in purchases or sales of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies’ (CMICs) securities on behalf of their non-U.S. employer?

For purposes of E.O. 13959, as amended, U.S. persons employed by non-U.S. entities are not prohibited from being involved in, or otherwise facilitating, purchases or sales related to a covered security on behalf of their non-U.S. employer, provided that such activity is in the ordinary course of their employment and the underlying purchase or sale would not otherwise violate E.O. 13959, as amended, (e.g., neither the purchase nor sale of the covered security is for the ultimate benefit of a U.S. person; neither the purchase or sale is a willful attempt to evade the prohibitions of E.O. 13959, as amended, etc.). &nbsp;[06-03-2021]

904. Under Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, are U.S. market makers permitted to facilitate divestment from publicly traded securities of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies (CMICs)? &nbsp;
Yes. &nbsp;U.S. market makers, and non-U.S. market makers who employ U.S. persons, are permitted to engage in activities that are necessary to effect divestiture during the during the 365-day periods in which divestment transactions are permitted or that are not otherwise prohibited under E.O. 13959, as amended, including the conversion of American depositary receipts (ADRs) of a CMIC into underlying securities of the CMIC on the foreign exchange where the underlying securities are listed. &nbsp;See FAQ 865 with respect to the permissibility of market intermediaries and other participants engaging in ancillary or intermediary activities that are necessary to effect divestiture of covered securities.&nbsp;[06-03-2021]

905.&nbsp;Does Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, prohibit U.S. persons from engaging in all activities with companies listed on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the &quot;NS-CMIC List&quot;)?

No. &nbsp;The prohibitions of E.O. 13959, as amended, apply only with respect to certain purchases or sales of publicly traded securities of entities listed on the NS-CMIC List. &nbsp;E.O. 13959, as amended, does not prohibit activity with entities listed on the NS-CMIC List that is unrelated to such securities, such as the purchase or sale of goods or services. &nbsp;E.O. 13959, as amended, also does not prohibit the purchase or sale of goods or services with respect to subsidiaries of such entities.&nbsp;[06-03-2021]

Belarus Sanctions

912.&nbsp;What does Belarus General License 3 (GL 3), “Authorizing Certain Transactions with the State Security Committee of the Republic of Belarus,” authorize?

Belarus GL 3 authorizes transactions and activities with the State Security Committee of the Republic of Belarus (the Belarusian KGB) that are necessary and ordinarily incident to requesting, receiving, utilizing, paying for, or dealing in certain licenses and authorizations for the importation, distribution, or use of certain information technology products in Belarus. &nbsp;It also authorizes transactions and activities necessary and ordinarily incident to compliance with rules and regulations administered by, and certain actions or investigations involving, the Belarusian KGB.

The GL was issued to ensure that U.S. persons engaging in certain business activities in Belarus that are not otherwise prohibited are not unduly impacted.&nbsp; Belarus GL 3 only authorizes certain transactions and activities with the Belarusian KGB acting in its administrative capacity and does not authorize U.S. persons to engage in transactions and activities with the Belarusian KGB except for the limited purposes described above. [06-21-2021]

913.&nbsp;Does Belarus GL 3 authorize the exportation of hardware or software to the Belarusian KGB, or where the Belarusian KGB is the end user of such hardware and software?&nbsp;

No.&nbsp; Belarus&nbsp;GL 3 does not authorize the exportation, reexportation, or provision of any goods, technology, or services to the Belarusian KGB or any other blocked person, except for the limited purposes of complying with rules and regulations administered by, and certain actions and investigations involving, the Belarusian KGB or requesting certain licenses or authorizations for the importation, distribution, or use of information technology products in Belarus.&nbsp;[06-21-2021]

&nbsp;">