     
   

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

SUBSIDIARY ORGANS
OF THE UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL

hited Nations Security Counci
Subsidiary Organs
httos:// .un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies
8 January 2021

The latest version of this document is available online at:
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/information
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 

Dia

De eas eed

 
| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Table of Contents

United Nations Security Council Sanctions REgiMes.........c..ccccccccceestscecestasseceteeees 4
Somalia Sanctions REiMEC...........ccccsccccecscssesesecseceecscsescesesecsenseseesecsseeceeseeceetsesecsenaas 6
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions REGIME ...........cccecccseseecsececssssscecesseseeesseeeees 8
IraQ SANCTIONS REGIMG...........cccccececessesseeseeseesesseaecsesseeseasensesseeseeseneeeseaeeeaeaeaeaeaeaeaeaeaea 10
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) Sanctions REgiMe...........ccccccccssceceeeees 12
SUdAN SAaNctiONs REGIME...........cccceecsecsscsseseceeceeseceessecseseessscseseesseseesceeseaeaeeeeeeeseesees 14
1636 Sanctions REGiIMG............ccceccsessesseeceeeseseseeseeseesessesseeseeseneeseseeeaeaeaeaeaeaeaeaeaeaea 16
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) Sanctions Regime.................00 18
Libya Sanctions REGIME... ccc cescsssscsecsescesesscsecsecseseseessecsesasseceeeesesetsssecseuaas 20
1988 SANctioNS REGIME... ceccccessessecsesseesessessesseeseeseesssesseseseseseseseseseseseseeeeenees 22
Guinea-Bissau Sanctions REGIME... ccccececessessecsessecesensesseseeseseseseseseseseseeeeeeeeess 24
Central African Republic (CAR) Sanctions REgime...........ccccccceccccesesececeeseeeeeeeens 26
Yemen Sanctions RESIMG..........ccccccscesessceseesessesseeseeceeseesessessesseeseneeaeseeeeeaeeeeeaeaeaeaeaeaea 28
South Sudan Sanctions REgiMe.........cccccccccsscsccscsescessesessseceecsessesscecssseecsssssseceeeeeees 30
Mali Sanctions REGIME oo..ecceeccccscccccsssscsssscsscessseceusecesecsscsssseseesesesensseceesecssesesscenees 32
UN Security Council Consolidated List... cccccccssceseesceeceeeseseessssseeeesseeeeeens 34
Focal Point for De@-listin gc ccccscccscssseesesseseesesescssseesscsecsecsecsesensussecseesesesasceceuaess 36
Office of the OMBUCSPerSON ue... ececcessesceseseseeseeseseeeeeceenseseseseeeeesesuesecsnsasseceeeeeses 38
Security Council Affairs Division Roster of Experts.........ccccccceccecseesseseesessseeeesaaes 40
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) wo... cccccceceesesccesceesscseeseessecsseeeesesssseesenaas 42
1540 COMMITEE... ere eer ene eer ener reer ene renner neniaae reared 44
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict... .ccccccccccscssesessessecsstssseceneeees 46
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations..........cccccccccccessesceecteceesseeeeeeseseesenas 48
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions....... 50
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa...... 52
Informal Working Group on International TribUnalls.......0....cccccccsscccestesseesseeeeeees 54

United Nations Security Council
Subsidiary Organs

https:/Awww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

United Nations Security Council Sanctions Regimes

History

The Security Council established its first
sanctions regime, in response to the
illegitimate seizure of power in Southern
Rhodesia, in 1968. To date, the Council has
established 30 sanctions regimes in total,
concerning: Southern Rhodesia, South Africa,
the Former Yugoslavia (2), Haiti, Angola,
Liberia (3), Eritrea/Ethiopia, Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, Céte d’lvoire, Iran, Somalia/Eritrea,
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, Iraq (2), DRC,
Sudan, Lebanon, DPRK, Libya (2), the Taliban,
Guinea-Bissau, CAR, Yemen, South Sudan and
Mali.

Sanctions regimes can, and have frequently
been, amended or lifted as the Council
continues to evaluate conflict situations.
Today, there are fourteen active regimes— with
the oldest concerning Somalia (established in
1992) and the newest concerning Mali. The
shortest sanctions regime to date, concerning
Eritrea/Ethiopia, was implemented from 17
May 2000 to 15 May 2001.

Over the past five decades, sanctions regimes
have changed in focus and scale. One of the
most significant changes has been the shift
away from use of comprehensive sanctions.
Since 2004, all new sanctions regimes have
been targeted, meaning that they are intended
to have limited, strategic focus on certain
individuals, entities, groups or undertakings.
The most common sanctions measures are
travel bans, asset freezes and arms embargos.

Diwa

Reet eee and

Effectiveness of sanctions over the last 24
years, measured as a function of policy
outcome and UN sanctions contribution to
that outcome, has been widely debated.
According to a recent comprehensive study
(see Targeted Sanctions ed. Biersteker et.
al., 2013}, UN targeted sanctions have been
assessed to be effectivein coercing abehavioral
change in 10% of cases. They are more
successful in constraining negative behavior
(in 28% of cases) and in signaling support for
international normative frameworks (in 27%
of cases).

It is important to note that sanctions do not
operate, succeed or fail in a vacuum. They
work best when coupled with a larger conflict
management strategy.

Structure
The Security Council establishes sanctions

committees, composed of — all Council
members, which are tasked ~~ with
implementation of sanctions regimes.

These committees are most often chaired
by non-permanent members of the Council.
The Council also often establishes expert
groups (frequently called Panels of Experts)
which support the work of committees.
Most members of these groups are based in
their home location, while two are based in
New York and one in Nairobi. In addition to
providing secretariat support to committees,
the Security Council Affairs Division (SCAD
is responsible for recruiting, managing and
supporting these expert groups.
Designation Criteria

In most sanctions regimes, the Council
establishes designation criteria for the
listing of individuals and entities for targeted
measures. Some common designation criteria
include: threats to peace, security or stability,
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, and obstruction of
humanitarian aid.

Sanctions Lists

There are over 1,000 listed individuals and
entities on the United Nations Security
Council Consolidated List. There is great
variation among the Committees, however.
For example, as of 10 February 2020, there are
over 300 individuals and entities listed for the
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al Qaida sanctions regime
but only 13 for the Central African Republic
sanctions regime.

De-listing Mechanisms

A Focal Point for De-listing was established in
the Secretariat by resolution 1730 (2006). As
of 10 February 2020, 100 de-listing requests
involving 77 individuals and 39 entities had
been received by the Focal Point, of which 89
have been processed completely. Seventeen
individuals and 17 entities were de-listed by the
relevant sanctions committees.

The Office of the Ombudsperson (whose
mandate covers only the sanctions list
maintained by the 1267/1989/2253
Committee) was established by resolution

2021
UNSC Sanctions Regime

 

 

1904 (2009). As of 10 February 2020, in
the 79 cases fully completed through the
Ombudsperson process, 54 individuals and 28
entities have been de- listed, one entity has
been removed as an alias of a listed entity and
20 de-listing requests have been refused.

Partnerships

Security Council sanctions committees and
expert panels work closely with specialized
entities like ICAO, IMO, WCO, and INTERPOL.

Ten Committees have special agreements with
INTERPOL allowing the UN Security Council to
issue INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special
Notices for those individuals and entities
subject to targeted measures. Currently, there
are over 600 Special Notices issued to help
with the implementation of travel bans, asset
freezes and targeted arms embargoes.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Somalia Sanctions Regime

Background

The sanctions regime on Somalia is the oldest
of the current sanctions regimes, dating back to
1992. In response to the rapidly deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation following
the downfall of President Said Barre and the
eruption of conflict between Somalia’s clans
and sub-clans, the Security Council imposed
a complete and general arms embargo on
Somalia by resolution 733 (1992). In April 1992,
the Council established the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) to oversee
the provision of humanitarian assistance.
UNOSOM gave way first to a multinational
coalition, the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), in
December 1992, and subsequently, in March
1993, to another Chapter VII operation,
UNOSOM II, which was eventually withdrawn
in March 1995. The current special political
mission, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), assists with the
stabilization and peacebuilding processes.

Sanctions Measures

Currently, the sanctions regime on Somalia
comprises an arms embargo, an assets
freeze, a travel ban, a charcoal ban, and an
IED components ban. In 2013, the Security
Council decided to ease the arms embargo
for the Federal Government of Somalia. At
the same time, the Council strengthened
the procedures for notification of arms
that are coming into Somalia, and required
more detailed reporting from the Federal
Government of Somalia on security sector
structures and arms management.

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Designation Criteria
Under the sanctions regime on Somalia, there
are several designation criteria, including:

e Engaging in, or providing support for,
acts that threaten the peace, security
or stability of Somalia, including acts
that threaten reconciliation processes
or obstruct, undermine or threaten the
Federal Government of Somalia, AMISOM
or UNSOM by force;

e Acting in violation of the arms embargo or
the arms resale and transfer restrictions;

e¢ Obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, or access to, or distribution of,
humanitarian assistance;

e Recruiting or using children in armed
conflicts in violation of applicable
international law by political or military
leaders;

e Violating applicable international law
involving the targeting of civilians including
children and women in situations of armed
conflict, including killing and maiming,
sexual and gender-based violence, attacks
on schools and hospitals and abduction
and forced displacement;

e Engaging in the export or direct or indirect
import of charcoal from Somalia;

e Engaging in any non-local commerce
via Al-Shabaab controlled ports which
constitutes financial support for a
designated entity;

¢ Misappropriating financial resources at all
levels in Somalia.
751 Sanctions Committee

The Committee, originally established
pursuantto resolution 751(1992),ismandated
to, inter alia, oversee the implementation of
the sanctions measures, designate individuals
and entities who meet the listing criteria, and
report to the Council on ways to strengthen
the measures. Decisions in the Committee
are reached by consensus through a five-
day no-objection procedure. The Permanent
Representative of Ireland currently chairs the
Committee. The two Vice-Chairs are Tunisia
and Viet Nam.

1844 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 15
individuals and one entity inscribed on the
1844 Sanctions List. Both the Committee
and the Focal Point for De-listing can receive
de-listing requests. Only the Committee,
however, can decide upon de-listings. In
addition to the 1844 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

The Panel of Experts on Somalia
The Sanctions Committee is supported by
the Panel of Experts on Somalia, which
is mandated, inter alia, to monitor and
investigate the implementation of the
sanctions measures, and to report on non-
compliance. The Panel is composed of six
experts (arms, armed groups, armed groups/
natural resources, finance, humanitarian, and

2021

Somalia
Sanctions Regime

 

 

maritime/regional) and is based in Nairobi.

UN and Other Partnerships

In January 2013, the Committee and INTERPOL
established an agreement for the exchange of
information. INTERPOL-UN Security Council
Special Notices for individuals and entities
designated by the Committee can be found
on the INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/751

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

Dea

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Regime

Background

By resolution 1267 (1999), the Security
Council imposed limited air and financial
embargoes to compel the Taliban to cease
providing sanctuary and training to terrorists,
including Usama Bin Laden. The Council
modified the regime by resolutions 1333
(2000) and 1390 (2002) and imposed targeted
measures against individuals and entities
associated with the Taliban and Al-Qaida. By
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), the
Council split the regime in two, establishing
one Committee for the Taliban and another
for Al-Qaida. By resolution 2253 (2015), the
Council expanded the listing criteria to include
those associated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL, or Da’esh), in addition to
Al-Qaida, and renamed the Committee the
1267/1989/2253 ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee.

Targeted Sanctions Measures
Currently, the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
sanctions regime comprises an arms embargo,
a travel ban and an assets freeze on individuals
and entities. By resolution 2368 (2017), the
Council clarified that the assets freeze also
applies to trade in petroleum products, natural
resources, chemical or agricultural products,
weapons, or antiquities, by listed individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, kidnapping
for ransom, and the proceeds of other crimes
including, trafficking in persons, extortion and
bank robbery.

Designation Criteria
The overarching criterion for which a
sanctions designation can be made, as set out

Sustaining Peace

in paragraph 2 of resolution 2368 (2017), is

acts or activities indicating association with

ISIL or Al-Qaida, which include the following:

e Participating in the financing, planning,
facilitating, preparing, or perpetrating of
acts or activities by, in conjunction with,
under the name of, on behalf of, or in
support of Al-Qaida, ISIL or affiliates;

e Supplying, selling or transferring arms
and related materiel to Al-Qaida , ISIL or
affiliates;

e Recruiting for Al-Qaida, ISIL or affiliates; or

e Otherwise supporting acts or activities of
Al-Qaida , ISIL or affiliates.

The ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida

Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee is, inter alia, to monitor
Member States’ implementation of the
targeted sanctions measures, to report to the
Councilonthe effectiveness of those measures,
to make recommendations on increasing the
effectiveness of current measures, to receive
and respond to notifications of violations, to
designate individuals and entities for listing,
and to consider requests for exemptions to
the measures.

Pursuant to resolution 2083 (2012), individuals
and entities currently listed on the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida Sanctions List may submit
requests for exemptions to the travel ban and
assets freeze measures for consideration by
the Committee, through the Focal Point for
De-listing established pursuant to resolution
1735 (2006). There are no exemptions to the
arms embargo.
Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a ten-day no-objection
procedure for listing and de-listing proposals
and a_ five-day no-objection procedure
for most other matters. Special decision-
making procedures, commonly known as
“reverse consensus”, apply to de-listing
either recommended by the Ombudsperson
or proposed by the Designating State. When
the Ombudsperson recommends de-listing or
the Designating State proposes de-listing, the
individual or entity will be de-listed, unless all
15 members unanimously object to the
de-listing. The matter can also be referred to
the Security Council for a decision.

The Deputy Permanent Representative of
Norway is the current Chair of the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, with the
Russian Federation and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines serving as Vice-Chairs.

The ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida

Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 262
individuals and 84 entities designated under
the ISIL(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
Both the Committee and the Ombudsperson
can receive de-listing requests. However, only
the Committee or the Council can decide
upon the de-listing of designated individuals
and entities.

In addition to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions List, there is also a UN Security
Council Consolidated List, which contains
the names of all individuals and entities
designated by the Council and its sanctions
committees.

| 2021

ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
anctions Regime

 

 

The Office of the Ombudsperson
An independent and impartial Ombudsperson
was appointed pursuant to resolution 1904
(2009) to receive de-listing requests directly
from designated individuals and_ entities
on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
List. The Ombudsperson reviews the case
and submits a comprehensive report to the
Committee along with a recommendation
on whether or not to remove the name. The
Ombudsperson’s mandate was most recently
extended in resolution 2368 (2017), until
December 2021.

Analytical Support and

Sanctions Monitoring Team

The ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee is supported by the ten-member
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004). Its mandate was most recently
extended by resolution 2368 (2017) until
December 2021. The Monitoring Team also
supports the work of the 1988 Sanctions
Committee.

UN and Other Partnerships

In 2005, the Committee and INTERPOL
established an agreement allowing for the
exchange of information between INTERPOL,
the Committee and the Monitoring Team.

INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special
Notices for individuals and entities designated
by the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee can be found on the INTERPOL
website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1267.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

Iraq Sanctions Regime

Background

In August 1990, in reaction to Iraq’s continued
occupation of Kuwait, the Security Council
adopted resolution 661 (1990) establishing
comprehensive sanctions against Iraq,
including an arms embargo.

Following the restoration of Kuwait’s sovereignty
in February 1991, the Council adopted resolution
687 (1991) in April 1991 which maintained the
arms embargo and demanded that Iraq end
its activities related to chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles with a
range greater than 150km.

In May 2003, following the fall of the Iraqi
Government, the Council modified the
sanctions regime in resolution 1483 (2003),
maintaining the arms embargo but providing
a provision for arms transfers to a newly
established authority to maintain security in
Iraq and along its borders.

In June 2004, with the adoption of resolution
1546 (2004), the Council decided that “the
prohibitions related to the sale or supply
to Iraq of arms and related materiel under
previous resolutions shall not apply to arms or
related materiel required by the Government
of Iraq or the multinational force” while
stressing that all states were obliged to abide
strictly by the restrictions on supply of arms
to other end-users in Iraq.

Sanctions Measures
The 1518 sanctions regime encompasses
an arms embargo and an assets freeze. The

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

prohibitions related to the sale or supply
to Iraq of arms and related materiel under
previous resolutions do not apply to arms or
related materiel required by the Government
of Iraq or the multinational force to serve
the purposes of resolution 1546 (2004).
The mandate of the multinational force was
subsequently terminated.

1518 Sanctions Committee

The Committee was mandated to continue
to identify, pursuant to paragraph 19 of
resolution 1483 (2003), individuals and entities
referred to in paragraph 19 of that resolution,
including by updating the list of individuals
and entities that have already been identified
by the Committee established pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 661 (1990), and to
report on its work to the Council.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Estonia is the current Chair of the 1518
Committee, with Norway serving as Vice-
Chair.

Designation Criteria

Individuals and entities whose names are
included in the sanctions list were designated
in connection with the measures contained
in paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483
(2003).

By paragraph 19, the Council decided that
the Committee shall identify individuals
and entities referred to in paragraph 23,
by which the Council decided that funds
or other financial assets or economic
resources of the previous Government of
Iraq or its state bodies, corporations, or
agencies, located outside Iraq as of the date
of the resolution, or funds or other financial
assets or economic resources that have
been removed from Iraq, or acquired, by
Saddam Hussein or other senior officials of
the former Iraqi regime and their immediate
family members, including entities owned
or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them
or by persons acting on their behalf or at
their direction, shall freeze, without delay,
those funds or other financial assets or
economic resources.

1518 Sanctions List
As of 10 February 2020, there are 86
individuals and 61 entities designated under
the 1518 sanctions regime.

Both the Committee and the Focal Point for
De-listing can receive de-listing requests. Only
the Committee, however, can decide upon
the de-listing of designated individuals and
entities. In addition to the 1518 Sanctions
List, there is also a UN Security Council
Consolidated List, which contains the names
of all individuals and entities designated by
the Council and its Sanctions Committees.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1518.

2021

 

lraq Sanctions Regime

 

 

United Nations Security Council

Sanctions Regimes
https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies
 

DRC Sanctions Regime

Background

In the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan
genocide, the First Congo War (1996-1997)
pitted the Rwandan Patriotic Army against
Hutu militias entrenched in refugee camps
in eastern Zaire. Following the downfall of
Mobutu Sésé Seko and his replacement by
Laurent-Désiré Kabila, the Second Congo
War began in August 1998. After the signing
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement between
the DRC and five regional States in July
1999, the Security Council established the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
by resolution 1279 (1999), initially to monitor
the ceasefire and disengagement of forces
and maintain liaison with all parties to the
Ceasefire Agreement. Despite the signing in
December 2002 of the Global and All Inclusive
Agreement on the Transition in the DRC and
the establishment of the Government of
National Unity and Transition, hostilities
continued in eastern DRC, particularly in
North and South Kivu.

Targeted Sanctions Measures
The 1533 sanctions regime encompasses an
arms embargo, an assets freeze and a travel
ban.

With the adoption of resolution 1493 (2003),
the Security Council imposed an arms
embargo on all armed groups and militias
operating in North and South Kivu and Ituri,
and on groups not party to the Global and All-
inclusive agreement of 28 July 2003.

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

The Council
targeted

subsequently modified the
sanctions regime, by imposing
additional targeted sanctions measures
(travel ban and assets freeze), and by
broadening the designation criteria. In March
2008, the Council narrowed the scope of the
arms embargo, which now applies only to
non-governmental entities and individuals
operating in DRC territory.

Designation Criteria

The overarching criterion for which a
sanctions designation can be made, as set out
in paragraph 7 of resolution 2293 (2016) is:

e Engaging in or providing support for acts
that undermine the peace, stability or
security of the DRC.

Such acts include:

e Acting in violation of the arms embargo;

e Being a political or military leader of a
foreign armed group operating in the DRC
and impeding disarmament and voluntary
repatriation of combatants belonging to
those groups;

e Being a_ political or
of Congolese militias who impede
the participation of combatants in
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement,
and reintegration processes;

e Recruiting and using children in armed
conflict in violation of applicable
international law;

e Planning, directing or committing acts
that constitute human rights violations or
abuses or violations of international law;

military leader
e Obstructing access to distribution of
humanitarian assistance in the DRC;

e Supportingindividuals or entities, including
armed groups or criminal networks,
involved in destabilizing activities in the
DRC through illicit exploitation or trade
of natural resources, including gold or
wildlife, as well as wildlife products;

e Acting on behalf of or at the direction of
a designated individual or entity, or acting
on behalf of or at the direction of an entity
owned or controlled by a designated
individual or entity;

e Planning, directing, sponsoring or
participating in attacks against MONUSCO
peacekeepers and United Nations
personnel, includings Groups of Experts;

e Providing financial, material, or
technological support for, or goods or
services to, or in support of a designated
individual or entity.

1533 Sanctions Committee

The Committee’s mandate is, inter alia, to
monitor Member States’ implementation of
the targeted sanctions measures, to report
to the Council on the effectiveness of those
measures and make recommendations to
increase effectiveness, to receive and respond
to notifications of violations, to designate
inviduals, and entities for listing, and to
consider exemption requests.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Niger is the current Chair of the 1533
Committee, with Estonia and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines serving as Vice-Chairs.

2021
DRC Sanctions Regime

 

 

1533 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 36 individuals
and 9 entities designated under the 1533
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and
the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-
listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals and entities.
In addition to the 1533 Sanctions List, there
is a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

Group of Experts on the DRC
The Sanctions Committee is supported
by a Group of Experts to monitor the
implementation of the sanctions regime.
The Group is composed of six experts (arms,
armed groups (2), finance/natural resources
(2) and humanitarian).

UN and Other Partnerships
In July 2010, the Council established
MONUSCO. One of its responsibilities is
to assist with the implementation and
monitoring of UN sanctions measures.

In March 2012, the Committee and INTERPOL
established an agreement allowing for the
exchange of information between INTERPOL,
the Committee and the Group of Experts.
INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special
Notices for individuals and entities designated
by the 1533 Committee can be found on the
INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1533.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Sudan Sanctions Regime

Background

In July 2004, the Security Council imposed
an arms embargo on all non-governmental
entities and individuals operating in Darfur,
condemning all acts of violence and
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by all parties to the crisis in
the region, in particular by the Janjaweed.

Less than a year later, deploring strongly that
the Government of Sudan, rebel forces and
all other armed groups in Darfur had failed
to comply fully with their commitments
and the demands of the Council, as well
as condemning the continued violations of
the N’Djamena Ceasefire Agreement and
the Abuja Protocols, and the failure of the
Government of Sudan to disarm Janjaweed
militiamen and to apprehend and bring them
to justice, the Council expanded the scope of
the arms embargo to apply to all parties to
the Agreement and any other belligerents in
Darfur.

At the same time, the Council also imposed a
travel ban and an assets freeze on individuals
(subsequently extended to entities), to be
designated by its newly established Sanctions
Committee. In April 2006, the Council
designated four individuals as subject to these
measures.

Targeted Sanctions Measures
Currently, the 1591 sanctions regime includes
an arms embargo in relation to Darfur, a travel
ban and an assets freeze.

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

The enforcement of the arms embargo
was strengthened in 2010 by clarifying
the exemptions to that measure and by
introducing a requirement for the relevant
end user documentation. The exemptions
were further updated in 2012.

Designation Criteria

There are five criteria for which a sanctions
designation can be made, as set out in
paragraph 3(c) of resolution 1591 (2005).
These criteria are:

e Impeding the peace process;

e Constituting a threat to stability in Darfur
and the region;

e Committing violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law or
other atrocities;

e Violating the arms embargo;

e Responsibility for offensive
overflights in Darfur.

military

1591 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 1591 Committee is to,
inter alia, monitor the implementation of the
targeted sanctions measures and consider
exemptions, designate individuals and
entities as subject to the measures, report
to the Security Council, assess reports from
the Panel of Experts and from Member States
on their implementation of the measures,
encourage a dialogue between the Committee
and interested Member States, in particular
those in the region, and respond effectively
to violations of or non-compliance with the
measures.
Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Estonia is the current Chair of the 1591
Committee, with Ireland and Viet Nam serving
as Vice-Chairs.

1591 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are four
individuals designated under the 1591
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and
the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-
listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals and entities.
In addition to the 1591 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

Panel of Experts on Sudan

The 1591 Committee is supported by a Panel
of Experts to monitor the implementation of
the sanctions regime. The Panel of Experts
was originally established by resolution
1591 (2005) and is composed of five experts
(arms and armed groups, transport/customs,
finance, international humanitarian law, and
regional).

UN and Other Partnerships

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), established by
resolution 1769 (2007), was given a mandate
to monitor the arms embargo. UNAMID
was requested in resolution 2228 (2015),

2021

Sudan Sanctions Regime

 

 

however, to discontinue all other tasks not
aligned to its revised strategic priorities, with
the latter not having included any reference
to the above-mentioned monitoring role. The
1591 Committee is encouraged to continue its
dialogue with UNAMID.

Since November 2012, the Committee and
INTERPOL have established an agreement
allowing for the exchange of information
between INTERPOL, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts. INTERPOL-UN Security
Council Special Notices for individuals
designated by the 1591 Committee can be
found on the INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1591.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

1636 Sanctions Regime

Background

Following the 14 February 2005 terrorist
bombing in Beirut, Lebanon, that killed
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and 22 others, the Security Council decided
on 7 April 2005 by resolution 1595 (2005)
to establish an international independent
investigation Commission to assist the
Lebanese authorities in their investigation
of all aspects of the attack, including to help
identify its perpetrators, sponsors, organizers
and accomplices.

1636 Sanctions Committee

The Committee was established on 31
October 2005 to register, as subject to the
travel ban and assets freeze imposed by
paragraph 3(a) of the resolution, individuals
designated by the international independent
investigation Commission or the Government
of Lebanon as suspected of involvement in
the 14 February 2005 terrorist bombing.

| 2021

 

FACT SHEETS

 

Targeted Sanctions Measures
Currently, the 1636 sanctions regime includes
an assets freeze and travel ban.

There are currently no individuals or entities
designated under the 1636 sanctions regime.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure.

The Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
is the current Chair of the 1636 Committee,
with Estonia and Norway serving as Vice-
Chairs.

For more information, the Committee’s
website can be found at: hittps://www.
un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/1636.
United Nations Security Council

Sanctions Regimes
https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

DPRK Sanctions Regime

Background

In response to nuclear tests and launches that
used ballistic missile technology conducted
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK), the Security Council adopted ten
resolutions imposing and/or strengthening
various sanctions measures on that country:
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087
(2013), 2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321
(2016), 2356 (2017), 2371 (2017), 2375 (2017)
and 2397 (2017).

Since 2006, the DPRK has conducted six
nuclear tests, the latest on 3 September 2017,
which the DPRK claimed to be a hydrogen
bomb. Since 2016, DPRK has also significantly
increased its ballistic missile testing activities.

In response, the Security Council, through
resolutions 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016), 2371
(2017), 2375 (2017) and 2397 (2017),
expanded and strengthened the DPRK
sanctions regime, i.e. by, clarifying and closing
loopholes in the existing measures and
introducing a number of additional measures
to the 1718 sanctions regime.

Targeted Sanctions Measures

Currently, the 1718 sanctions regime is
composed of an arms and related materiel
embargo; a nuclear, ballistic missiles and other
WMD programmes-related embargo; sectoral
sanctions, which ban coal, minerals, fuel,
food and agricultural products, earth, stone,
wood, industrial machinery, transportation
vehicles, seafood, textiles and luxury goods;
bans, limits and places restrictions on the

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

DPRK’s access to energy sources such as crude
oil and refined petroleum products; financial
sanctions; interdiction and transportation-
related measures; a travel ban and/or assets
freeze on designated individuals and entities;
a ban on providing work authorizations
for DPRK nationals and a requirement to
repatriate DPRK nationals earning income;
a ban on the supply, sale or transfer of new
helicopters and new and used vessels, as
well as a ban on procuring statues from the
DPRK; and sanctions provisions targeted at
proliferation networks.

Designation Criteria

As referred to in paragraph 8(d) and 8(e)
of resolution 1718 (2006), the following
designation criteria will be applied to
individuals or entities:

e« Individuals or entities engaged in
or providing support for, including
through other illicit means, the DPRK’s
nuclear-related, other weapons of mass
destruction-related and ballistic missile-
related programmes.

e Individuals or entities being responsible
for, including through supporting or
promoting, the DPRK’s policies in relation
to the DPRK’s nuclear-related, ballistic
missile-related and other weapons of mass
destruction-related programmes.

1718 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 1718 Committee is to, inter
alia, oversee the relevant targeted sanctions
measures and undertake several main tasks.
The Committee seeks information from Member
States on their implementation of the sanctions
measures; examines and takes appropriate
action on alleged violations; determines
additional items, materials, equipment, goods
and technology and designates individuals and
entities as subject to the measures imposed
by the resolutions; and designates vessels that
are, or have been, related to violations of the
maritime measures and other activities, such as
transporting prohibited items to the DPRK.

The Committee considers and decides upon
requests for exemptions to the measures,
which includes a comprehensive humanitarian
exemption mechanism adopted in 2018, and
promulgates guidelines as necessary to facilitate
the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Resolution 2397 (2017) specifically directs the
Committee to make publicly available on its
website the total amount of refined petroleum
products sold, supplied, or transferred to the
DPRK by month and by source country, as
reported by Member States. Resolution 2321
(2016) also directs the Committee to hold special
meetings on important thematic and regional
topics and Member States’ capacity challenges,
to identify, prioritize, and mobilize resources
to areas that would benefit from technical and
capacity-building assistance to enable more
effective implementation by Member States.
Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Norway is the current Chair of the 1718
Committee, with Estonia and Tunisia acting as
Vice-Chairs.

2021
DPRK Sanctions Regime

 

 

1718 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 80 individuals
and 75 entities designated under the 1718
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and
the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-
listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals and entities.
In addition to the 1718 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and
its sanctions committees. There are also 58
vessels designated for their involvement
with the DPRK’s nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes, other prohibited activities, or
as economic resources of designated entities
and individuals.

Panel of Experts on the DPRK
The 1718 Committee is supported by a
Panel of Experts that assists the Committee
in implementing its mandate to monitor,
promote and facilitate the implementation
of the Security Council measures. The Panel
of Experts was originally established by
resolution 1874 (2009) and is composed of
eight experts (customs and export controls;
finance and economics; maritime transport;
non-proliferation, procurement and trade;
non-proliferation and regional security;
nuclear issues; other WMD and conventional
arms).

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1718.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Libya Sanctions Regime

Background

In February 2011, condemning the violence
and use of force against civilians in the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, as well as the repression of
peaceful demonstrations, the Security Council
imposed a series of measures, including an
arms embargo, an assets freeze and a travel
ban, aimed at preventing the situation from
deteriorating further.

The following month, deploring non-
compliance by the Libyan authorities with
its previous resolution, and expressing grave
concern at the escalation of violence and
the heavy civilian casualties, the Council
authorized further measures to protect
civilians, including the establishment of a
no-fly zone. Subsequently, in recognition of
positive developments in Libya, including
the peaceful transfer of authority from the
National Transitional Council to the first
democratically constituted national unity
government, the Council lifted or eased
several of the aforementioned measures.

However, in March 2014, expressing concern
that the illicit export of crude oil from Libya
undermined the Government of Libya and
posed a threat to the peace, security and
stability of Libya, the Council broadened the
scope of the sanctions regime to include
additional measures aimed at preventing such
exports. Less than six months later, deploring
the increasing violence in Libya, condemning
the ongoing fighting by armed groups, and
expressing deep concern at the threat posed
by unsecured arms and ammunition and their
proliferation, the Council reinforced the arms
embargo and expanded the designation criteria

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

for targeted sanctions to include, inter alia,
acts that threatened the successful completion
of the political transition in the country. The
designation criteria were further elaborated in
March 2015, June 2017 and November 2018.

Also in June 2017, the Council expanded the
application of the measures in relation to illicit
exports of crude oil to cover such exports of
petroleum

Targeted Sanctions Measures
Currently, the 1970 sanctions regime includes
a two-way arms embargo on Libya, an assets
freeze, a travel ban, and measures in relation
to attempts to illicitly export petroleum from
Libya. Provisions for inspection of cargo to and
from Libya, and of designated vessels illicitly
exporting petroleum from Libya, including on
the high seas off the coast of Libya, are also
included.

Designation Criteria

The criteria for which a sanctions designation

can be made include:

e Being involved in or complicit in ordering,
controlling, or otherwise directing, the
commission of serious human rights abuses
against persons in Libya, including by
being involved in or complicit in planning,
commanding, ordering or conducting
attacks, in violation of international
law, including aerial bombardments on
civilian populations and facilities and
acts involving sexual and gender-based
violence.

e Having violated the provisions of
resolution 1970 (2011), particularly the
arms embargo, or to have assisted others
in doing so.
e Vessels that illicitly export pertroleum
from Libya.

e Planning, directing, or committing, acts
that violate applicable international
human rights law” or _ international
humanitarian law, or acts that constitute
human rights abuses, in Libya.

e Attacks against any air, land, or sea port in
Libya, or against a Libyan State institution
or installation, or against any foreign
mission in Libya.

e Providing support for armed groups
or criminal networks through the illicit
exploitation of crude oil or any other
natural resources in Libya.

e Threatening or coercing Libyan state
financial insitutions and the Libyan
National Oil Company, or engaging in any
action that may lead to or result in the
misappropriation of Libyan state funds.

e Acting for or on behalf of or at the direction
of a listed individual or entity.

e Attacks on United Nations personnel.

1970 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 1970 Committee is to,
inter alia, monitor the implementation of the
targeted sanctions measures and consider
exemptions, designate individuals, entities or
vessels as subject to the measures, report to
the Security Council, encourage dialogue with
interested Member States, seek information
from States on their implementation of the
measures, examine and take appropriate
action on violations or non-compliance.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of India is the current Chair of the 1970
Committee, with Ireland serving as Vice-Chair.

1970 Sanctions List

2021

Libya Sanctions Regime

 

 

As of 10 February 2020, there are 28 individuals
and two entities designated under the 1970
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and
the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-
listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals and entities.
In addition to the 1970 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

Panel of Experts on Libya

The 1970 Committee is supported by a Panel
of Experts to monitor the implementation of
the sanctions regime. The Panel of Experts
was originally established by resolution
1973 (2011) and is composed of six experts
(arms (2), finance, armed groups, maritime/
transport, and armed groups/regional).

UN and Other Partnerships
In September 2011, the Council established
a United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), which is encouraged to support the
Panel’s investigatory work inside Libya.

In June 2013, the Committee and INTERPOL
established an agreement allowing for the
exchange of information between INTERPOL,
the Committee and the Panel of Experts.
INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special
Notices for individuals and entities designated
by the 1970 Committee can be found on the
INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1970.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

1988 Sanctions Regime

Background

By resolution 1267 (1999), the Security Council
imposed limited air and financial embargoes
to compel the Taliban to cease providing
sanctuary and training to terrorists, including
Usama Bin Laden. The Council modified the
regime by resolutions 1333 (2000) and 1390
(2002) and imposed targeted measures
against individuals and entities associated
with the Taliban and Al-Qaida. By resolutions
1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), the Council
split the regime in two, establishing one
Committee for the Taliban and another for the
Al-Qaida. Resolution 1988 (2011), followed
by resolutions 2082 (2012), 2160 (2014) and
2255 (2015) concern the sanctions measures
against the Taliban, and other individuals and
groups associated with them.

By splitting the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
into separate regimes, the Security Council
recognised that some members of the Taliban
have reconciled with the Government of
Afghanistan, rejected the terrorist ideology
of Al-Qaida and its followers, and support a
peaceful resolution of the continuing conflict
in Afghanistan. The Council accorded the
Afghan Government a visible and consultative
role in the process of listing and de-listing
under the sanctions regime. At the same time,
the Council recognised that some individuals
and entities related to the Taliban may still
retain links to Al-Qaida and might therefore
be subject to inclusion on both sanctions lists.

Targeted Sanctions Measures
The 1988 sanctions regime imposes three
measures against individuals and entities

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

designated on the 1988 Sanctions List: an
assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo.

Designation Criteria

The criterion for which a sanctions designation
can be made is “association with the Taliban
in constituting a threat to the peace, stability
and security of Afghanistan”. Resolution 2255
(2015) explains the elements of association in
paragraph 2, as follows:

Individuals, groups, undertakings and entities

e Participating in the financing, planning,
facilitating, preparing or perpetrating of
acts or activities for the Taliban;

e Supplying, selling or transferring arms and
related materiel to the Taliban;

e Recruiting for the Taliban;

e Otherwise supporting acts or activities of
those designated and other individuals,
groups, undertakings and _ entities
associated with the Taliban in constituting
a threat to the peace, stability and security
of Afghanistan.

Any individual or entity that provides support
to those designated based on the above
criteria shall also be eligible for listing.

1988 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 1988 Sanctions
Committee is to, inter alia, monitor Member
States’ implementation of the targeted
sanctions measures, to report to the Council
on the effectiveness of those measures, to
make recommendations on increasing the
effectiveness of current measures, to receive
and respond to notifications of violations, to
designate individuals and entities for listing,
and to consider exemption requests based on
the exemptions set out in paragraphs 1 and
2 of resolution 1452 (2002), as amended by
resolution 1735 (2006) for the assets freeze,
and paragraphs 17 to 22 of resolution 2255
(2015) for the travel ban and asset freeze.

Decisions in the Committee are reached
by consensus. The Committee’s practice
is to reach consensus through a_ ten-day
no-objection procedure for listing and de-
listing proposals and a five-day no-objection
procedure for all other matters. There is a
three-day no-objection procedure on assets
freeze exemption requests for basic expenses
only.

Recognizing that the political reconciliation
process requires listed individuals to travel,
resolution 2160 (2014) granted to the
Government of Afghanistan the possibility of
requesting exemptions from the travel ban
for multiple individuals and destinations for
a period of up to nine months. When travel
in support of the peace and reconciliation
efforts by the Government of Afghanistan is
required, the Commitee will decide on the
request using a no-objection procedure of
five days.

The Permanent Representative of India is the
current Chair of the 1988 Committee with the
Russian Federation and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines serving as Vice-Chairs.

1988 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 135
individuals and 5 entities designated under the
1988 sanctions regime. Both the Committee
and the Focal Point for De-listing can receive

2021

 

1988 Sanctions Regime

 

de-listing requests. Only the Committee or
the Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals and entities.
In addition to the 1988 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

Analytical Support and

Sanctions Monitoring Team

The 1988 Sanctions Committee is supported
by the Monitoring Team established pursuant
to resolution 1526 (2004). The Monitoring
Team is composed of ten experts and also
supports the work of the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-
Qaida Sanctions Committee.

UN and Other Partnerships

The Committee and INTERPOL established
an agreement allowing for the exchange
of information between INTERPOL, the
Committee and the Monitoring Team. The
INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special Notices
for all individuals and entities designated by
the 1988 Sanctions Committee can be found
on the INTERPOL website.

The Monitoring Team has had an information-
sharing agreement with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan since 2013.
Since 2015, similar agreements have been
made with the Combined Maritime Forces
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/1988.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Guinea-Bissau Sanctions Regime

Background

On 12 April 2012, before the second round
of the presidential elections, elements of
the armed forces of Guinea Bissau staged a
military coup d’état. In response to increasing
instability and violence in the country, the
Security Council took a series of measures
to re-establish peace and security, including
imposing targeted sanctions on members of
the military junta, which was governing the
country. In May 2012, by resolution 2048,
the Security Council imposed a travel ban on
five individuals. In July 2012, the Sanctions
Committee approved the listing of another six
individuals subject to a travel ban.

Sanctions Measures
Currently, the 2048 — sanctions
encompasses a travel ban only.

regime

Designation Criteria

There are currently two criteria for which a
sanctions designation can be made, as set
out in paragraph 6 of resolution 2048 (2012).
Those criteria include persons who are
determined to be:

e Seeking to prevent the restoration of the
constitutional order or taking action that
undermines stability in Guinea-Bissau, in
particular those who played a leading role
in the coup d’état of 12 April 2012 and who
aim, through their actions, to undermine
the rule of law, curtail the primacy of
civilian power and further impunity and
instability in the country;

e Acting for, or on behalf of, at the direction
of, or otherwise supporting or financing
individuals identified in the criteria above.

2048 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 2048 Committee is to
monitor Member States’ implementation
of the sanctions measures, to report to the
Councilonthe effectiveness of those measures,
to make recommendations on increasing the
effectiveness of current measures, to receive
and respond to notifications of violations, to
designate individuals and entities for listing,
and to consider exemption requests based
on the exemptions set out in paragraph 5 of
resolution 2048 (2012).

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Tunisia is the current Chair of the 2048
Committee, with Kenya serving as Vice-Chair.

2048 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are 10 individuals
designated under the 2048 sanctions regime.
Both the Committee and the Focal Point for
De-listing can receive de-listing requests. Only
the Committee, however, can decide upon
the de-listing of designated individuals and
entities. In addition to the 2048 sanctions
list, there is also a UN Security Council
Consolidated List, which contains the names
of all individuals and entities designated by
the Council and its sanctions committees.

UN and Other Partnerships
On 20 February 1999, the UN Security Council
approved the establishment of the UN
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). On 1 January 2010, UNIOGBIS was
replaced by the UN Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

The core responsibilities of UNIOGBIS are,
inter alia, to support an inclusive political
dialogue and national reconciliation process
to strengthen democratic governance and
work towards consensus on key political
issues; to provide strategic and technical
advice and support to national authorities
and relevant stakeholders in implementing
the national security sector reform and rule
of law strategies, as well as developing civilian
and military justice systems that are compliant
with international standards; to support the
Government of Guinea-Bissau towards the
mobilization, harmonization and coordination
of international assistance; to support the
Government in strengthening democratic
institutions and the rule of law; to provide
advice and support for the establishment of
efficient law enforcement and criminal justice
and penitentiary systems; to assist national
authorities in the promotion and protection
of human rights as well as human rights
monitoring and reporting; and to support the
Government in combatting drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime.

In March 2014, the Committee and INTERPOL

2021

Guinea-Bissau
Sanctions Regime

 

 

established an agreement allowing for the
exchange of information between INTERPOL
and the Committee. INTERPOL-UN Security
Council Special Notices for individuals
designated by the 2048 Committee can be
found on the INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/2048.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

CAR Sanctions Regime

Background

Since independence in 1960, the Central
African Republic (CAR) has experienced
multiple coup d’états with peace and security
implications for the entire region. Following
the Séléka coup d’état on 24 March 2013,
the political and security situation in the
country has remained highly unstable and
unpredictable. In response to this increasing
instability and violence in the country and
region, the Security Council took a series of
measures to re-establish peace and security,
including calling for a ceasefire, establishing
a sanctions regime, and deploying a United
Nations mission to, inter alia, protect civilians;
support the implementation of the transitional
political process; promote and protect human
rights; and support national and international
justice and rule of law efforts.

Targeted Sanctions Measures

On 5S December 2013, by resolution 2127
(2013), the Security Council first applied
sanctions by imposing an arms embargo on
the country. The arms embargo requested
Member States to prevent the supply of
arms and related materiel and provision of
mercenaries to the CAR. On 28 January 2014,
the Council further stregthened the sanctions
regime with resolution 2134 (2014), applying
targeted sanctions (travel ban and assets
freeze) against individuals and entities in
breach of the acts specified below.

Designation Criteria

There are currently 10 criteria for which
a sanctions designation can be made. In

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

accordance with paragraphs 20 and 21 of
resolution 2399 (2018), sanctions measures
can be applied against individuals and entities:

e Knowingly facilitating the travel of a listed
indivdiual in violation of the travel ban;

e Engaging in or providing support for acts
that undermine the peace, stability or
security of the CAR;

e Acting in violation of the arms embargo;

e Involved in planning, directing, or
committing acts that violate international
human rights law” or international
humanitarian law, as applicable, or
that constitute human rights abuses or
violations;

e Involved in planning, directing, or
committing acts involving sexual and
gender-based violence;

e Recruiting or using children in armed
conflict in the CAR;

e Providing support for armed groups
or criminal networks through the illicit
exploitation of natural resources;

e Obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the CAR, or access to, or
distribution of, humanitarian assistance in
the CAR;

e Involved in planning, directing, sponsoring,
or conducting attacks against UN missions
or international security presences;

e Leading, or having provided support to,
or acting for or on behalf of or at the
direction of, an entity that the Committee
has designated.
Pursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 2339
(2017), individuals who knowingly facilitate
the travel of a listed individual in violation
of the travel ban may also be determined to
have met the designation criteria.

2127 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 2127 Committee includes
the following: monitor Member States’
implementation of the sanctions measures;
report to the Council on the effectiveness
of its measures; receive and respond to
notifications of violations; assess reports
by the Panel of Experts; review information
regarding individuals violating the arms
embargo, designate names to be subject to
the assets freeze and travel ban; and consider
exemption requests.

All decisions in the Committee are reached
by consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Niger is the current Chair of the 2127
Sanctions Committee, with Viet Nam serving
as Vice-Chair.

2127 Sanctions List
As of 10 February 2020, there are 11
individuals and two entities designated under
the 2127 sanctions regime.

Delisting requests can be submitted directly to
the Committee by Member States or through
the Focal Point for De-listing by individuals,
entities, or parties acting on their behalf.
Only the Committee or the Council, however,
can decide upon the de-listing of designated
individuals and entities. In addition to the
2127 Sanctions List, there is also a UN Security
Council Consolidated List, which contains

2021
CAR Sanctions Regime

 

 

the names of all individuals and entities
designated by the Council and its sanctions
committees.

Panel of Experts on CAR

The Sanctions Committee is supported
by a Panel of Experts, which provides
the Committee with information on the
potential designation or listing of individuals
violating the arms embargo; monitors the
implementation of the sanctions measures;
and assists the Committee to refine and
update information on its sanctions list. The
Panel of Experts was established by resolution
2127 (2013) and is composed of five experts
(arms, armed groups, humanitarian, regional
and finance/natural resources).

UN and Other Partnerships

In April 2014, by resolution 2149 (2014),
the Security Council established the UN
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the CAR (MINUSCA). One of its
responsibilities is to assist the Committee,
including by monitoring the implementation
of the sanctions measures.

In June 2014, the Committee and INTERPOL
have established an agreement allowing
for the exchange of information between
INTERPOL, the Committee and the Panel
of Experts. INTERPOL-UN Security Council
Special Notices for individuals and entities
designated by the 2127 Committee can be
found on the INTERPOL website.

The Committee’s website can be found
at: https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/

sanctions/2127.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Yemen Sanctions Regime

Background

In 2011, following a series of anti-
Government demonstrations in Yemen, one
of which resulted in the killing of at least 45
protesters, an agreement brokered by the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) was signed
by President Ali Abdullah Saleh, providing for
his transfer of power to Vice-President Abd
Rabbo Mansour Hadi and immunity from
prosecution.

In 2012 and 2013, the Security Council
expressed its readiness to consider measures,
including under Article 41 of the Charter
of the United Nations, if actions aimed at
undermining the Government of National
Unity and the Yemeni political transition
continued.

In February 2014, the Council imposed an
assets freeze and a travel ban on individuals
and entities engaging in or providing support
for acts that threatened the peace, security or
stability of Yemen.

In August 2014, the Security Council noted
with concern that the Houthis and others
continued to stoke the conflict in the north
of Yemen in an attempt to obstruct the
political transition. The Council expressed
grave concern about the deterioration of
the security situation in Yemen in light of the
actions taken by the Houthis and those who
supported them.

The Committee designated former President

Saleh and two Houthi individuals on
7 November 2014. The Security Council

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

designated the leader of the Houthi
movement, Abdulmalik al-Houthi, as well
as former President Saleh’s son, Ahmed
Ali Abdullah Saleh, on 14 April 2015, also
imposing a targeted arms embargo on
designated individuals and entities.

Targeted Sanctions Measures
Currently, the 2140 sanctions regime consists
of an assets freeze, a travel ban, and a targeted
arms embargo against individuals and entities
on the 2140 sanctions list.

Designation Criteria

The overarching criterion for which a
sanctions designation can be made, as set out
in paragraph 17 of resolution 2140 (2014), is:

e Engaging in or providing support for
acts that threaten the peace, security or
stability of Yemen.

Such acts may include, but are not limited to:

e Obstructing or undermining the successful
completion of the political transition,
as outlined in the GCC Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism Agreements;

e Impeding the implementation of the
outcomes of the final report of the
comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference through violence, or attacks
on essential infrastructure;

e Planning, directing, or committing acts that
violate applicable international human
rights law or international humanitarian
law, or acts that constitute human rights
abuses, in Yemen;
e Violating the targeted arms embargo;

e Obstructing the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Yemen, or the access to and
distribution of humanitarian assistance
within Yemen.

2140 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 2140 Committee is to,
inter alia, monitor the implementation of
the targeted sanctions measures with a view
to strengthening, facilitating and improving
implementation; to seek and review
information regarding those _ individuals
and entities who may be engaging in the
aforementioned acts; to designate individuals
and entities; to report to the Security
Council; to encourage a dialogue between
the Committee and interested Member
States; to seek information from states on
their implementation of the measures; and
to examine and take appropriate action on
alleged violations or non-compliance.

The Committee is directed to cooperate with
other Security Council sanctions committees,
in particular the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is the
current Chair of the 2140 (2014) Committee,
with Estonia serving as Vice-Chair.

2140 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are five
individuals designated under the 2140
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and
the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-

2021

Yemen Sanctions Regime

 

 

listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals or entities. In
addition to the 2140 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
Sanctions Committees.

Panel of Experts on Yemen

The 2140 Committee is supported by a Panel
of Experts, which provides information
on individuals and entities that meet the
designation criteria and monitors the
implementation of the sanctions regime.
The Panel is composed of five experts
(armed groups, arms, finance, international
humanitarian law and regional).

UN and Other Partnerships

The Committee receives inspection reports
from the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen (UNVIM),
which was instituted to ensure compliance
with resolution 2216 (2015) for vessels sailing
to ports of Yemen not under Government
control.

In December 2014, the Committee and
INTERPOL established an agreement allowing
for the exchange of information between
INTERPOL, the Committee and the Panel
of Experts. INTERPOL-UN Security Council
Special Notices for individuals designated
by the 2140 Committee can be found on the
INTERPOL website.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/2140.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

South Sudan Sanctions Regime

Background

In December 2013, internal political disputes
among South Sudan’s political and military
leaders led to the outbreak of a conflict
between the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan and opposition forces. Despite
the signing of a “Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement” on 23 January 2015 between the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan
and the opposition Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement, fighting between the parties
continued. In response, on 3 March 2015,
the Security Council imposed a travel ban
and assets freeze on individuals or entities
responsible for or complicit in actions or
policies that threaten the peace, security or
stability of South Sudan.

Subsequently, the parties signed the 17
August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
(ARCSS)the 21 December 2017 Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of
Civilians and Humanitarian Access (ACOH),
and the 27 June 2018 Khartoum Declaration
(S/2018/641). Following continuous violations
of those agreements, the Council imposed
an arms embargo on the territory of South
Sudan on 13 July 2018 and sanctioned two
individuals. On 12 September 2018, the
parties agreed to a Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan (R-ARCSS).

Targeted Sanctions Measures
The 2206 sanctions regime encompasses
a travel ban, an assets freeze and an arms
embargo.

Designation Criteria

Under the sanctions regime on South Sudan,
there are eight designation criteria. These
criteria, set out in paragraph 7 of resolution
2206 (2015), expanded by resolution 2428
(2018) and renewed by resolution 2471
(2019), apply to individuals engaging in:

e Actions or policies that have the purpose
or effect of expanding or extending the
conflict in South Sudan or obstructing
peace processes, including breaches of
the ARCSS;

e Actions or policies that threaten
transitional agreements or undermine
the political process in South Sudan;

e Planning, directing, or committing acts that
violate applicable international human
rights law or international humanitarian
law, or acts that constitute human rights
abuses, in South Sudan;

e The targeting of civilians, including women
and children, through the commission
of acts of violence or through conduct
that would constitute a serious abuse or
violation of human rights or a violation of
international humanitarian law;

e Planning, directing, or committing acts
involving sexual and gender-based
violence in South Sudan;

e The use or recruitment of children by
armed groups or armed forces in the
context of the armed conflict in South
Sudan;

e The obstruction of the activities of
international peacekeeping, diplomatic,
or humanitarian missions in South Sudan,
or of the delivery or distribution of, or
access to, humanitarian assistance;

e Engagement by armed groups or criminal
networks in activities that destabilize
South Sudan through the illicit exploitation
or trace of natural resources;

e Attacks against United Nations missions,
international security presences, or other
peacekeeping operations, or humanitarian
personnel; or

e Actsfororonbehalfof, directly orindirectly,
an individual or entity designated by the
Committee.

2206 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 2206 Committee includes
the following: to monitor Member States’
implementation of the sanctions measures;
to report to the Council on the effectiveness
of those measures; to examine and take
appropriate action on information regarding
alleged violations or non-compliance; to
review information regarding individuals
and entities violating the arms embargo; to
designate individuals and entities for listing
and consider exemption requests; and to
encourage a dialogue between the Committee
and interested Member States, in particular
those in the region.

All decisions in the Committee are reached
by consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam is the current Chair of the 2206
Sanctions Committee, with the Ireland and
Mexico serving as Vice-Chairs.

2206 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are eight
individuals designated under the 2206
sanctions regime. Both the Committee and

2021

South Sudan
Sanctions Regime

 

 

the Focal Point for De-listing can receive de-
listing requests. Only the Committee or the
Council, however, can decide upon the de-
listing of designated individuals or entities. In
addition to the 2206 Sanctions List, there is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
sanctions committees.

Panel of Experts on South Sudan
A Panel of Experts supports the 2206
Committee. The Panel provides information
on individuals and entities that meet the
designation criteria and monitors the
implementation of the sanctions regime. The
Panel is composed of five experts (armed
groups/regional issues, arms, finance,
humanitarian affairs and natural resources).

UN and Other Partnerships

In June 2015, the Committee and INTERPOL
established an agreement allowing for the
exchange of information between INTERPOL,
the Committee and the Panel of Experts.
INTERPOL-UN Security Council Special
Notices for individuals designated by the 2206
Committee can be found on the INTERPOL
website.

By resolution 2428 (2018), the Security
Council encouraged timely information
exchange between UNMISS and the Panel of
Experts, while requesting UNMISS to assist the
Committee and the Panel within its mandate
and capabilities.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/2206.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Mali Sanctions Regime

Background

By resolution 2374 (2017), the Security Council
imposed targeted sanctions on individuals
and entities hindering the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali signed in 2015 by the Government of
Mali, the Plateforme of armed groups, and the
Coordination des Mouvements de l’Azawad
coalition of armed groups. In August 2017,
due to the resumption of hostilities between
the Plateforme and the Coordination des
Mouvements de |’Azawad, the Government
of Mali had requested the Security Council to
immediately establish a regime of targeted
sanctions against those responsible for
obstructing the implementation of the
Agreement. Having previously expressed its
readiness in resolution 2364 (2017) of 29 June
to consider targeted sanctions against those
who take actions to obstruct or threaten the
implementation of the Agreement, those who
resume hostilities and violate the ceasefire,
those who attack and take actions to threaten
MINUSMA and other international presences,
as well as those who provide support to such
attacks and actions, the Security Council
adopted unanimously resolution 2374 (2017)
on 5 September 2017. On 30 August 2018,
with the adoption of resolution 2432 (2018),
the Security Council renewed until 31 August
2019 the measures set out in paragraphs 1 to
7 of resolution 2374 (2017).

Targeted Sanctions Measures
The 2374 sanctions regime encompasses a
travel ban and an assets freeze.

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Designation Criteria

The travel ban and assets freeze apply to

individuals and/or entities, as designated

for such measures by the 2374 Sanctions

Committee, as responsible for or complicit

in, or having engaged in, directly or indirectly,

the following actions or policies that threaten
the peace, security, or stability of Mali:

e Engaging in hostilities in violation of the
Agreement;

e Actions taken that obstruct, or that
obstruct by prolonged delay, or that
threaten the implementation of the
Agreement;

e Acting for or on behalf of or at the direction
of or otherwise supporting or financing
individuals and entities identified in
the above subparagraphs, through the
proceeds from organized crime, including
the trafficking of narcotic drugs, the
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of
migrants, the trafficking of arms, and the
trafficking in cultural property;

e Involvement in planning, directing,
sponsoring, or conducting attacks against
institutions established by the Agreement,
Malian armed forces, United Nations
missions and personnel, and other forms
of international security presence;

e Obstructing the delivery of, or access to,
or distribution of humanitarian assistance;

e Planning, directing, or committing acts
in Mali that violate international human
rights law or international humanitarian
law, or that constitute human rights abuses
or violations, including those involving the
targeting of civilians, including women
and children, through the commission
of acts of violence, abduction, enforced
disappearance, forced displacement, or
attacks on schools, hospitals, religious
sites, or locations where civilians are
seeking refuge;

e The use or recruitment of children by
armed groups or armed forces in violation
of applicable international law, in the
context of the armed conflict in Mali.

2374 Sanctions Committee

The mandate of the 2374 Sanctions Committee
includes the following: to monitor Member
States’ implementation of the sanctions
measures; to designate individuals and entities
to be subjected to the travel ban and assets
freeze, and to consider exemption requests;
to examine and take appropriate action on
alleged violations or non-compliance; and to
encourage dialogue between the Committee
and interested Member States (particularly
regional states) and with international,
regional and sub-regional organizations.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative
of Mexico is the current Chair of the 2374
Committee, with Kenya serving as Vice-Chair.

2374 Sanctions List

As of 10 February 2020, there are eight
individuals (three subject to the travel ban
and five subject to the travel ban and assets
freeze) designated under the 2374 sanctions

2021

Mali Sanctions Regime

 

 

regime. Both the Committee and the Focal
Point for De-listing can receive de-listing
requests. Only the Committee or the Council,
however, can decide upon the de-listing of
designated individuals or entities. There is
also a UN Security Council Consolidated List,
which contains the names of all individuals
and entities designated by the Council and its
Sanctions Committees.

Panel of Experts on Mali

A Panel of Experts supports the 2374
Committee. The Panel provides information
on individuals and entities that meet the
designation criteria and monitors the
implementation of the sanctions regime.
The Panel is composed of four experts
(humanitarian affairs, regional, finance and
armed groups).

UN and Other Partnerships

The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) was established by the Security
Council in April 2013. By resolution 2374
(2017), the Security Council encouraged
timely information exchange between
MINUSMA and the Panel of Experts, and
requested MINUSMA to assist the Committee
and the Panel of Experts, within its mandate
and capabilities.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/sanctions/2374

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

UN Security Council Consolidated List

Background

Article 41 of the United Nations Charter
stipulates that the Security Council may
decide which measures, not involving the use
of armed force, are to be employed to give
effect to its decisions. The Council may then
call upon the Members of the United Nations
to apply such measures. Targeted measures
apply to specific individuals and entities, and
the measures most frequently employed
by the Security Council include the arms
embargo, the assets freeze and the travel ban.

The measures, as applied to specific
individuals and entities, appear on the
sanctions committees’ websites. The United
Nations Security Council Consolidated List is
an amalgamation of all Committee-specific
sanctions lists and the 2231 List.

The Committee-specific sanctions lists may
be found on the respective webpages of the
relevant committees: https://www.un.or
securitycouncil/sanctions/information. The
2231 List may be found at the following
URL: https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/
content/2231/list.

The United Nations Security Council
Consolidated List was first made available
online in English on 29 October 2014. On
28 December 2015, the Consolidated List
became accessible in the six official languages

Diwa

Reet eee and

of the United Nations. It can be found here:
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
un-sc-consolidated-list.

The inclusion of all names in one Consolidated
List is meant to facilitate the implementation
of the measures. This, however, does not imply
that all names are listed under one sanctions
regime since the criteria for listing of names
are Committee-specific. The sanctions lists
and the 2231 List are available in XML, PDF
and HTML formats.

Composition of the Consolidated
List

The names included in the Consolidated
List are separated in two sections, “Section
A” comprising individuals and “Section
B” comprising entities. Names are listed
alphabetically as they appear in Latin script.
On 30 August 2016, versions of these lists, with
names listed by their permanent reference
numbers (PRN), were made available.

PRNs specify the sanctions regime under
which a name is listed. For example, PRNs
starting with “QD” refer to the ISIL (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida sanctions regime, whereas PRNs
starting with CF refer to names listed under
the UN sanctions regime concerning the
Central African Republic. The following letter

refers to individuals and “e” to entities.

won
l
A detailed explanation of the fields, identifiers
and acronyms used in the lists is provided on
the Consolidated List page.

Assistance with the Lists

All questions relating to the Committee-
specific sanctions list or to the United Nations
Security Council Consolidated List may be
sent to sc-sanctionslists@un.org.

2021

 

United Nations
Sanctions List

 

United Nations Security Council

Sanctions Regimes
https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

Focal Point for De-listing

Background

In 2006, the Security Council established
the Focal Point for De-listing within the
Department of Political Affairs, as part of
the Council’s commitment to ensure that
fair and clear procedures existed for placing
individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions.

The Focal Point receives and processes de-
listing requests from individuals and entities
on all sanctions lists except for the ISIL
(Da’esh) & Al-Qaida Sanctions List, which is
dealt with by the Office of the Ombudsperson
established in 2009. In accordance with the
Focal Point procedures, as outlined in the
annex to resolution 1730 (2006), the decision
to de-list rests solely with the relevant
sanctions committee.

As of 10 February 2020, 100 de-listing requests
involving 77 individuals and 39 entities had
been received by the Focal Point, of which 89
have been processed completely. Seventeen
individuals and seventeen entities were de-
listed by the relevant sanctions committees.

Additional mandated tasks

In 2012, the Focal Point was given the
additional task of receiving, and transmitting
to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee for its decision, travel ban and
assets freeze exemption requests in relation
to individuals, groups, undertakings or entities
on the ISIL (Da’esh) & Al-Qaida Sanctions List.
The mandate was extended in 2015 to apply

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

to such exemption requests in connection
with the 1988 Sanctions List as well.

In 2014, the Council gave the Focal Point
the additional task of receiving and
transmitting to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, for its consideration,
communications from individuals de-listed
from the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
List and from individuals claiming to have
been mistakenly subjected to the sanctions
measures in relation to ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-
Qaida.

In addition to making use of the channel
of the Focal Point for the issues described
above, petitioners may submit their requests
or communications to the relevant Sanctions
Committee through the State of citizenship or
residence (or location in the case of an entity).

Summary of the

process

After an individual or an entity has submitted a
de-listing request to the Focal Point, it is shared
with the States that originally proposed listing
as well as with the States of citizenship and
residence. Those States have three months to
review the de-listing request and provide any
comments. They may also seek an extension
of the time period for review.

de-listing

There are provisions in place for the Focal
Point to facilitate contact between the
reviewing States, in order for them to engage
in consultations.
Thereafter, according to procedure and
practice, three scenarios may occur:

(1) A reviewing State recommends de-listing,
in which case the request will be circulated
for the consideration of the Committee. If no
Committee member objects, the petitioner is
de-listed. If, however, a Committee member
objects, the individual/entity remains on the
list.

(2) A reviewing State opposes the request, in
which case Committee members will be given
one month to share with the reviewing States
any information in support of the request. If
such information is forthcoming and leads
to a recommendation to de-list, the request
will be circulated for the consideration of
the Committee, as described above. If no
supporting information is forthcoming from
any Committee member, the individual/entity
remains on the list.

(3) No reviewing State comments, in which
case Committee members will be given one
month to recommend de-listing, if they so
wish. If a Committee member recommends
de-listing, the request will be circulated for the
consideration of the Committee, as described
above. If no recommendation is forthcoming,
the individual/entity remains on the list.

Should reviewing States express contradictory
views (one State supports and another
opposes), the relevant Committee will decide
how to proceed, taking into account past
precedents.

2021

Focal Point for De-listing

 

 

Following the conclusion of the process, the
Focal Point informs the petitioner of the
outcome.

If the de-listing request is unsuccessful,
petitioners may re-apply, provided that there
is additional information in the new de-listing
request.

Contact details of the Focal Point
Focal Point for De-listing

Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch
Room DC2 2030

United Nations

New York, N.Y. 10017

United States of America

Tel. +1 917 367 9448

Fax. +1 212 963 1300

Email: delisting@un.org

For more information, including the informal
annual reports of the Focal Point, the Focal
Point website can be found at: https://www.
un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/delisting.

 

United Nations Security Council

Sanctions Regimes
https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Office of the Ombudsperson

Background

The Office of the Ombudsperson was created
by Security Council resolution 1904 (2009),
adopted on 17 December 2009, and _ its
mandate was last extended until 17 December
2021 by resolution 2368 (2017), adopted on
20 July 2017.

Listed individuals or entities seeking delisting
from the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
List can submit their request to an independent
and impartial Ombudsperson who has been
appointed by the Secretary-General. As
of 10 February 2020, in the 79 cases fully
completed through the Ombudsperson
process, 54 individuals and 28 entities have
been de-listed, one entity has been removed
as an alias of a listed entity and 20 de-listing
requests have been refused.

The current Ombudsperson is Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati. He was appointed by the Secretary-
General on 31 May 2018 and took up his
official duties on 18 July 2018.

Mandate

The Ombudsperson’s mandate is contained
in Security Council resolution 2368 (2017).
The Ombudsperson is mandated to
receive requests from individuals, groups,
undertakings or entities seeking to be
removed from the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
Sanctions List and to present observations and
a recommendation on the de-listing to the ISIL
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.

Procedure
The procedure for de-listing begins with
a preliminary determination by the

Ombudsperson that the request properly
addresses the designation criteria applicable
to the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions
List.

(1) Information Gathering phase - The
information gathering phase is designed
to allow the Ombudsperson to collect as
much detailed information as possible from
relevant States, the Monitoring Team and
other relevant actors. This is essential to
ensure that the Committee has before it all
pertinent material in deciding on the request.
The initial period for information gathering is
four months. The Ombudsperson can extend
the period for up to two additional months.

(2) Dialogue phase - The information gathering
phase is followed by a two month period
during which the Ombudsperson facilitates
engagement and dialogue with the Petitioner
and, by relaying questions and responses,
between the Petitioner, relevant States, the
Committee and the Monitoring Team. This
critical phase provides an opportunity for the
Ombudsperson to explore in detail with the
Petitioner the various aspects of the case. It
gives the Petitioner an opportunity to be heard,
to address issues and answer questions with
the goal of ensuring that his or her position
is fully explained and understood. The time
period for dialogue can also be extended for
up to two months.

During this same _ time period, the
Ombudsperson prepares a report on the
de-listing request. This report provides
a comprehensive review of the case. It
summarizes the information gathered and
sets out the principal arguments concerning
the de-listing request, based on an analysis
of all the available information and the
Ombudsperson’s observations. It also
contains a recommendation on de-listing of
the individual or entity for the Committee’s
consideration. The Ombudsperson either
recommends that the individual or entity
remain on the list, or that the Committee
consider de-listing.

(3) Committee Discussion and Decision - After
the Committee has had 15 days to review
the Ombudsperson’s report in all official
United Nations languages, it is placed on the
Committee’s agenda for consideration. The
Committee’s review of the report is completed
within 30 days of its submission by the
Ombudsperson. The Ombudsperson presents
the report in person to the Committee and
answers questions.

Where the Ombudsperson recommends
retaining the listing, the individual or entity
remains on the list and subject to the sanctions
measures, unless a Committee member
submits a de-listing request that is approved
under the Committee’s standard procedures.

Where the Ombudsperson recommends
that the Committee consider de-listing, the
individual or entity is removed from the list
unless within 60 days, the Committee decides,
by consensus, that the individual or entity
should remain subject to the sanctions. Where
consensus does not exist, the Committee
Chair, on request of a Committee Member
can refer the question of de-listing to the
Security Council. The Security Council then
has a further 60 days to make its decision. As

2021

Office of the Ombudsperson

 

 

of 10 February 2020, there has never been
a consensus to maintain sanctions in a case
where de-listing was recommended, nor any
referral to the Security Council.

After the Committee’s consideration of the
report, the Ombudsperson may notify all
relevant States of her recommendation. With
the Committee’s approval and subject to
redactions of confidential information, the
Ombudsperson may also provide a copy of
her report to designating States and States of
nationality or residence at their request.

Within 30 days, the Committee conveys to
the Ombudsperson whether sanctions are
to be retained or terminated, setting out
reasons for the retention or termination.
Where appropriate, the Committee also
provides an updated Narrative Summary. The
Ombudsperson transmits this information to
the Petitioner.

Contact details

Office of the Ombudsperson
Room DC2-2206

United Nations

New York, NY 10017

United States of America

Tel: +1 212 963 2671

E-mail: ombudsperson@un.org

For more information, including the bi-
annual reports of the Ombudsperson to the
Security Council, the status of cases and the
Ombudsperson’s approach to standards of
analysis, assessment of information and
confidentiality, the website of the Office of
the Ombudsperson can be found at https://
www.un.org/securitycouncil/ombudsperson.

United Nations Security Council
Sanctions Regimes

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Security Council Affairs Division Roster of Experts

The Security Council Affairs Division (SCAD)
of the United Nations Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs (DPPA) assists the
Security Council in carrying out its critical
responsibilities. It provides procedural
advice, analysis, forward planning, reporting,
research and assistance in the administration
of Security Council sanctions regimes.

A key component of SCAD’s role is to manage
and support monitoring groups, teams and
panels. created by the Council to assist
committees in overseeing sanctions regimes.
These expert panels play critical roles
through, inter-alia, monitoring instances of
non-compliance of UN sanctions. The Council
determines the mandate lengths of any one
panel upon its creation and may choose to
renew them. Timeframes for establishment
and subsequent renewal of these panels

differs between regimes.

Purpose

In order to ensure efficient recruitment
processes and minimize gaps in the
composition of expert panels, SCAD maintains
a roster of qualified individuals who can
be called on to serve in available roles as
required.

Individuals are invited to join the roster after
being referred to SCAD or identified through
outreach activities. A dedicated team within
SCAD is responsible for screening candidates
and inviting selected individuals to join the

Diwa

Reet eee and

Roster. An invitation to join the Roster does

not, however, guarantee an_ individual’s
selection for a position.

Composition

In developing the Roster, SCAD bases

its recruitment on the specific expertise
requirements of the Council and its sanctions
committees. These fields fall within the broad
focus of Security Council sanctions regimes
as they relate to non-proliferation, counter-
terrorism and intra-state conflicts. A complete
list of the areas of expertise is detailed on the
following page.

Roster members are drawn from a variety of
fields, including the United Nations, national
administrations, academia, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. Most
are mid- and senior-level professionals. To
serve on Panels, individuals must possess a
minimum of ten years of relevant professional
experience, including three years of field
experience.

Special emphasis is placed on gender equality
and geographic diversity.
2021
SCAD Roster of Experts

 

 

The Roster at present consists of approximately
550 qualified individuals. Their areas of
expertise include:

e armed groups

e border control/customs

e children and armed conflict

e conventional arms

e counter-terrorism

e finance

e humanitarian affairs/human rights

e international law

e judiciary (criminal/prosecution)

e law enforcement

e narcotics

e natural resources

e regional expertise

e sexual and gender based violence

e transportation (maritime/air)

e weapons of mass destruction/non-
proliferation

SCAD Roster Inquiries
Referrals and enquires about joining the
Roster may be directed to the SCAD Roster
Team at expertsroster@un.org.

 

United Nations Security Council
Roster of Experts

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies
 

@

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)

Background

The  Counter-Terrorism Committee is
mandated to monitor the implementation
by Member States of measures to prevent
terrorist acts proscribed by resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005).

Resolution 1373, adopted on 28 September
2001, calls upon Member States to implement
a number of measures intended to enhance
their legal and institutional ability to counter
terrorist activities, including taking steps to:
criminalize the financing of terrorism; freeze
without delay any funds related to persons
involved in acts of terrorism; deny all forms of
financial support for terrorist groups; suppress
the provision of safe haven, sustenance or
support for terrorists; share information with
other governments on any groups practising
or planning terrorist acts; cooperate with
other governments in the investigation,
detection, arrest, extradition and prosecution
of those involved in such acts; and criminalize
active and passive assistance for terrorism in
domestic law and bring violators to justice.

Resolution 1624 (2005), relating to incitement
to commit acts of terrorism, calls on States
to prohibit it by law, prevent such conduct
and deny safe haven to anyone guilty of such
incitement.

Resolution 2178 (2014) identified the

increasing threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters as an emerging issue which merits

Diwa

Reet eee and

close attention by the CTC. Resolution 2178
requests the CTC, with the support of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), to take on the following
tasks: first, to identify principal gaps in Member
States’ capacities to implement resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) which may
hinder States’ abilities to stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters; second, to identify
good practices to stem the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters in the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005); and
third, to facilitate technical assistance.

Resolution 2396 (2017) further urges Member
States to strengthen their efforts to stem
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
through measures on border control, criminal
justice and information-sharing and counter-
extremism.

Most recently, resolution 2482 (2019)
expresses concern that terrorists can benefit
from organized crime, whether domestic
or transnational, as a source of financing or
logistical support, and emphasizes the need
to coordinate efforts at the local, national,
sub-regional, regional, and international level
to respond to this challenge, in accordance
with international law, including by promoting
international legal cooperation.

Decisions in the Committee are reached by
consensus through a two-day no-objection
procedure. For implementation assessments
(stocktaking), the period is five days. The
Permanent Representative of Tunisia is the
current Chair of the CTC, with France, India
and the Russian Federation serving as Vice-
Chairs.

Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED)

The CTC is assisted by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
established by resolution 1535 (2004),
which carries out the policy decisions of the
Committee, conducts expert assessments of
each Member State and facilitates counter-
terrorism technical assistance to countries.
Resolution 2395 (2017) renewed the mandate
of CTED until 31 December 2021.

Sub-Committees

Three sub-committees were established
to ensure thoroughness, consistency,
transparency and even-handedness in the
Committee’s analysis and stocktaking of
Member States’ implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2004). The sub-committees are chaired by
the Vice-Chairs of the Committee.

Each sub-committee conducts stocktaking by
reviewing the Overview of Implementation
Assessment (OIA), which is prepared by CTED.
The OIA, once approved by the relevant sub-
committee, is transmitted to the Committee
forits approval. The OlAis then shared with the

2021

Counter-Terrorism
Committee

 

 

relevant Member State for a response. CTED
also prepares the Detailed Implementation
Survey (DIS), which is a working document
circulated to the relevant sub-committee for
information only.

Country Reports

Reports on resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) received from Member States are
available on the Committee’s website. For
resolution 1373 (2001), only reports dated
from 2001 through 2006 are available. A
decision was made to not make subsequent
reports on this resolution public. In line with
the revised stocktaking procedures, the OIA
may be shared (in full or in part) with other
Member States if the concerned Member
State consents to sharing.

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/
sc/ctc/.

United Nations Security Council
Other Committees

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

1540 Committee

Background and Mandate

On 28 April 2004, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1540 (2004) under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, obliging States, inter
alia, to refrain from supporting by any means
non-State actors from developing, acquiring,
manufacturing, possessing, transporting,
transferring or using nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their delivery systems.

Resolution 1540 (2004) imposes binding
obligations on all States to establish domestic
controls to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, and their
means of delivery, including by establishing
appropriate controls over related materials.
It also encourages enhanced international
cooperation on such efforts, in accordance
with, and promoting universal adherence
to, existing international non-proliferation
treaties.

Resolution 1540 (2004) also established
a Committee to monitor and promote
implementation of these national legal
measures. The mandate of the Committee was
renewed by resolution 1977 (2011) until 25
April 2021. Along with collecting and reviewing
national reports, the 1540 Committee has also
created matrices to present a fuller picture of
the status of implementation in all states that
have submitted their mandated implementation
reports. The Permanent Representative
of Mexico is the current Chair of the 1540
Committee, with India, Niger and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
serving as Vice-Chairs.

Diwa

Reet eee and

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

On 15 December 2016, the Council adopted
resolution 2325 (2016) calling on all States to
strengthen national non-proliferation regimes in
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
submit timely reports on their efforts.

1540 Committee Working Groups
The 1540 Committee decided in its sixteenth
programme of work to continue to operate
in a system of four Working Groups, open
to all of its members. The Working Groups
focus on important and recurring issues. Each
Working Group has specific tasks related to
the programme of work, which are set out
below. Each Working Group is coordinated by
a member of the Committee, and is supported
by the Secretariat and the Committee’s Group
of Experts. The Committee meetings include
periodic feedback by the Working Groups
responsible for tracking progress with respect
to monitoring and national implementation;
assistance; cooperation with international
organizations, including the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and Counter-
Terrorism Committee; and transparency and
media outreach.

Working Groups:

(i) Monitoring and national implementation
(ii) Assistance

(iii) Cooperation with international
organizations, including the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and Counter-
Terrorism Committee

(iv) Transparency and media outreach
National Reports

The initial focus of the 1540 Committee’s
work was raising awareness about resolution
1540 (2004) and encouraging submissions
of national implementation reports which
provide details of the measures States have
taken, or intend to take, to implement the
resolution. As of 8 January 2019, 182 States
(and the European Union) have submitted
their first national reports.

The Group of Experts developed a ‘matrix’
to examine the status of Member States’
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
matrix draws upon legislative and enforcement
measures provided in the national reports,
as well as information from official websites
and other governmental sources. A list of
matrices of Member States as approved by
the Committee is available on the Committee’s
website. In 2017, the Committee approved
a revised matrix to reflect developments in
international legal instruments as well as the
scientific and technical fields.

Assistance

As States have different capacities to
implement the resolution, provision was
made in resolution 1540 (2004) for States to
request and offer assistance. The Committee
serves as a clearinghouse for dealing with
requests for assistance by facilitating bilateral
State arrangements as well as drawing
upon the expertise and experience with
assistance programmes of inter-governmental
organizations such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), the Organisation

2021
1540 Committee

 

 

for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the World Customs Organization
(WCO) or the World Health Organization
(WHO). Subsequent resolutions called for the
Committee to strengthen its role in facilitating
technical assistance for implementation of
resolution 1540, in particular by engaging
actively in matching offers and requests for
assistance.

1540 Group of Experts

The 1540 Committee is supported by a nine-
member Group of Experts. Paragraph 5 (b)
of resolution 1977 (2011) requested the
Committee to consider recommendations for
the Committee and the Group of Experts on
expertise requirements, broad geographic
representation, working methods, modalities
and structure, including consideration of the
feasibility of a coordination and leadership
position of the Group of Experts. In this
regard, the Committee submitted a report to
the Security Council on 30 December 2011,
(S/2011/819).

For more information, the Committee’s

website can be found at: http://www.un.org/
en/sc/1540.

United Nations Security Council
Other Committees

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/subsidiary-bodies

 
 

@

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict

The Security Council adopted its first
resolution on children and armed conflict in
1999 when, by resolution 1261, it condemned
the violation of children’s rights in armed
conflict, appealed to the parties to armed
conflict to respect international law and raised
the question of how to separate children from
armed forces and groups, as well as how to
facilitate their disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration. In 2000,
the Security Council noted in resolution
1314 that committing systematic, flagrant
and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including
that relating to children, in situations of
armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security. The Security
Council has been receiving annual reports
from the Secretary-General on the issue of
children and armed conflict since 2006.

Mandate

With the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005), the Security Council established the
Working Group consisting of all members
of the Council, along with a monitoring and
reporting mechanism dedicated to collecting
information regarding grave violations against
children and armed conflict. The Working
Group was mandated to review reports on
violations against children affected by armed
conflict committed by parties to armed
conflict that are listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict.

The annexes list parties to armed conflict that

Diwa

Reet eee and

engage in the recruitment and use of children,
sexual violence against children, the killing and
maiming of children, abduction and forced
displacement of children, attacks on schools
and hospitals and attacks or threats of attacks
against protected personnel, in contravention
of international law. The Working Group
is also mandated to review progress on
the development and implementation of
national action plans on children and armed
conflict called for in resolution 1539 (2004)
and to consider other relevant information.
Decisions in the Working Group are reached
by consensus through a five-day no-objection
procedure. The Permanent Representative of
Belgium is the current Chair of the Working
Group, with Niger serving as the Vice-Chair.

Toolkit

On the basis of its mandate, the Working Group
adopted on 6 December 2006 a document (S/
AC.51/2007/2) listing possible direct action by
the Working Group which may include:

e Recommendations for further assistance
to the country concerned

e Requests for assistance or advocacy (to
relevant UN bodies, the SRSG for Children
and Armed Conflict)

e Letters/appeals

e Expressions of support

e Démarches

e Requests for additional information
or monitoring (to Secretary-General,
Representative of affected countries)

e Specific field trips on children and armed
conflict by members of the Working Group
e Open/closed meetings with parties
concerned

e Press conferences, in addition to press
releases following the adoption of
Working Group conclusions

The toolkit also outlines possible

recommendations to the Security Council,
including communications to be transmitted
to the Chairs of relevant Security Council
sanctions committees.

The Working Group carries out tasks entrusted
toitin the context of the conclusions, including
by travelling to countries in support of the
implementation of the respective mandate.
Following the adoption of conclusions on
children and armed Conflict in Mali in May
2018, the Working Group travelled to Mali in
December 2019.

Periodic Reports of the

Secretary-General

The periodic reports of the Secretary-General
that are considered by the Working Group
emanate from the monitoring and reporting
mechanism called for in resolution 1539
(2004), and are introduced formally by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict.

Conclusions of the Working
Group

Conclusions of the Working Group contain
recommendations to parties to armed conflict,
Member States, the United Nations system,
donors and other relevant actors. Messages
to parties to armed conflict are issued in the
form of a Security Council press release.

| 2021

Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict

 

 

The Working Group shall also make
recommendations to the Council on possible
measures to promote the protection of
children affected by armed conflict, including
through recommendations on appropriate
mandates for peacekeeping missions and
recommendations with respect to the parties
to armed conflict, and address requests, as
appropriate, to other bodies within the United
Nations system for action to support the
implementation of the conclusions.

Most recently, on 30 July 2019, the
Working Group adopted its conclusions
(S/AC.51/2019/2) emanating from the report
of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in Myanmar (S/2018/956).

UN and Other Partnerships

The Working Group regularly receives updates
from the field through a Global Horizontal Note
which is presented by UNICEF. Members of
the Working Group also hear regular updates
on current issues and activities relevant to
children and armed conflict from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict. Since 2015, the
Working Group has convened various joint
informal consultations with Security Council
sanctions committees, including concerning
the situation of children and armed conflict in
the Central African Republic, Yemen and South
Sudan.

For more information, including access to
reports of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, the Working Group’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/subsidiary/wgcaac.

United Nations Security Council
Working Groups

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 
 

Dea

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations

Background

The Security Council established the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, pursuant
to a decision contained in a statement by its
President (S/PRST/2001/3) on 31 January
2001.

In the statement, the Council reiterated its
agreement to hold consultations with troop-
contributing countries in a timely manner
at different stages of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, without replacing the
private meetings with the troop-contributing
countries. The Council tasked the Working
Group to undertake an in- depth consideration
of ways to improve the three-way relationship
between the Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat and to report to
the Council.

The Working Group was established in the
context of the report of the Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2000/809), also known as
the “Brahimi report”, and the work on
implementation and follow-up to that report.
On 14 January 2002, the Council agreed on a
mechanism to improve cooperation between
the Council and troop-contributing countries
(S/2002/56). The mechanism consists of
joint meetings between the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and relevant troop-contributing countries.
It complements the format of public and
private meetings provided for by resolution
1353 (2001) and represents an important
step forward in the Council’s relationship with
those countries.

Sustaining Peace

The Security Council, in a statement by
its President on 31 December 2015 (S/
PRST/2015/26), noted the recommendations
of the Secretary-General’s report entitled ‘The
Future of United Nations Peace Operations:
Implementation of the Recommendations
of the High-Level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations’ (S/2015/682) and the
recommendations of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446), with respect to
consultations between the Security Council,
troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat and in particular within the
Working Group.

In resolution 2378 (2017) on the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations,
adopted on 20 September 2017, the Council
requested the Working Group to review
reform initiatives in close cooperation with
other Member States, including troop- and
police-contributing countries and _ host
countries.

Mandate

The Council established the Working Group
to address both generic peacekeeping
issues relevant to the responsibilities of the
Council, and technical aspects of individual
peacekeeping operations, without prejudice
to the competence of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34). Where
appropriate, the Working Group seeks the
views of the troop-contributing countries.
The Permanent Representative of Tunisia
is the current Chair of the Working Group,
with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland serving as Vice- Chair.

Activities

Meetings of the Working Group focus on
coordination within the peacekeeping
architecture and important thematic issues
related to peacekeeping, with a view to
feeding into decisions of the Security
Council. The agenda of the Working Group
has covered the following thematic topics:
strategic dialogue between the Council, TCCs/
PCCs and the Secretariat, mission start-ups
and re-hatting challenges; strategic force
generation; the use of modern technology
in peacekeeping; transition and drawdown
of missions; inter-mission cooperation; the
women, peace and security agenda; women’s
participation in peacekeeping; troop and
police preparedness; the safety and security
of peacekeeping missions; the protection of
civilians; partnerships; and the role of United
Nations police in peacekeeping. The Working
Group has also addressed the African Union's
institutional reform and contributions to
enhancing peace and security in Africa during
a joint meeting with the Ad-Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa and dedicated meetings to the
discussion of specific peacekeeping missions
in the continent.

UN and Other Partnerships

Members of the Working Group are briefed on
a regular basis by senior UN officials, including
from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Field Support,
and the Department of Safety and Security.

2021

Working Group on Peace-
keeping Operations

 

 

Representatives of the Peacebuilding
Commission have also addressed the Working
Group. Furthermore, the Working Group has
received briefings from representatives of
regional organizations, such as the African
Union.

The Working Group coordinates _ its
activities with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) and the
Military Staff Committee to ensure efficient
and comprehensive approaches to issues of
common interest.

More information, including annual reports
and other documentation, can be found at the
website of the Working Group: https://www.
un.org/securitycouncil/subsidiary/wgpko.

United Nations Security Council
Working Groups

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions

Background

The Security Council Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions (IWG) was established in June
1993 to improve the process by which the
Security Council addresses issues concerning
its documentation and other procedural
questions. The Working Group meets as
agreed by members of the Council and makes
recommendations, proposals and suggestions
concerning the Council’s documentation and
other procedural questions.

Since 2006, the Informal Working Group has
been chaired by a member of the Security
Council for an extended period, usually 12
months. Japan (2009-2010; 2016-2017) and
Argentina (2013-2014) and Kuwait (2018-
2019) both chaired the Group for two
consecutive years. For the year 2021, the
Chair of the Informal Working Group is the
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, with Estonia serving as
Vice Chair.

Substantive and technical support to the
Informal Working Group is provided by the
Security Council Affairs Division (SCAD) of the
United Nations Secretariat.

Guidance on Council practice

The Informal Working Group has drafted
a series of documents concerning the
working methods of the Security Council,
including measures to enhance its efficiency,
transparency and interactivity, which have
been adopted by the Security Council as

Notes by the President.

Note by the President S/2017/507:

A comprehensive compilation
The Note by the President of 30 August 2017
(S/2017/507), drafted under the Chairmanship
of Japan, is the most recent comprehensive
compilation of these measures, integrating
and further developing previous notes drafted
by the Group. The revised note incorporates
measures agreed to by the Security Council
concerning its working methods and
contained in 13 other presidential notes
adopted after the issuance of the Note by the
President of 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507). Those
13 notes include the contributions of IWG
under the Chairmanships of Portugal (2012);
Argentina (2013-2014); Angola (2015); and
Japan (2016-2017).

On 27 December 2019, the Security
Council issued eight additional Notes by
the President (S/2019/990, $/2019/991,
$/2019/992,  $/2019/993,  $/2019/994,
$/2019/995,  $/2019/996,  $/2019/997),
drafted by the Informal Working Group under
the Chairmanship of Kuwait (2018-2019)
addressing the following topics:

- Provisional programme of work

- Wrap-up sessions

- Reports of the Secretary-General in
connection with consultations
with troop- and police-contributing
countries

- Selection of Chairs of subsidiary bodies

- Security Council missions
| 2021

Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions

 

 

- Timeline for the adoption of the
Annual Report to the General
Assembly

- Participation of incoming elected
members

- The gender pronoun used in the
Provisional Rules of Procedure

For more information, the Informal Working
Group’s website can be found at: https://
www.un.org/securitycouncil/subsidiary/

wegdocs.

United Nations Security Council
Working Groups

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and

Resolution in Africa

Background

The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa has
its origins in the Presidential Statement
of 31 January 2002 (S/PRST/2002/2), in
which the Security Council recognized the
need for adequate measures to prevent
and resolve conflicts in Africa. The Council
also expressed its intention to consider
establishing an Ad Hoc Working Group to
monitor the recommendations contained in
that statement.

Mandate

The Terms of Reference for the Working
Group were agreed on 1 March 2002, as set
out in the Note by the President $/2002/207
and include, inter alia:

To monitor the implementation of
recommendations contained in Security
Council decisions regarding conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa.

To examine, in particular, regional and cross
conflict issues which affect the Council’s work
on African conflict prevention and resolution.

To propose recommendations to the Security
Council to enhance cooperation in conflict
prevention and resolution between the
United Nations and regional and sub-regional
organizations, such as the African Union (AU).

To follow up on the Communiqués of the
annual consultative meetings between the

UN Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

Methods of Work

The Working Group holds informal meetings
and takes decisions by consensus. The Chair
reports to the Council whenever appropriate.

Ahead of its meetings, the Chair will often
circulate a concept note relevant to the
thematic issues or specific items to be
considered, in order to help guide and enrich
the discussion.

Several recent Chairs of the Working Group
have placed significant emphasis on opening
the Group’s meetings to non-members of
the Security Council. Recent Chairs have
encouraged open and frank discussions in
order to cultivate ideas that could positively
contribute to the enhancement of the work of
the Security Council.

The Permanent Representative of Kenya is
the current Chair of the Working Group, with
Niger serving as Vice-Chair.

Activities

In accordance with its mandate, the Working
Group has undertaken a broad range of
activities. It has provided the Security Council
with specific sets of recommendations on a
host of matters, including on the “Group of
Friends” concept; on cooperation with the
African Union; on enhancing the effectiveness
of SRSGs in Africa; and on country specific
situations.

On the basis of informal discussion and
interaction with relevant players, the Working
Group has provided inputs to Security Council
missions to Africa.

It has organised and convened workshops
and seminars on issues, including on effective
conflict prevention strategies in Africa and
on strengthening the relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union in
the maintenance of international peace and
security. It has shared the outcome of those
events with the Security Council.

The Working Group has convened informal
meetings on geographical issues and a wide
range of topics, including the responsibility to
protect; early warning mechanisms in relation
to election-related violence; root causes of
conflict and emerging challenges in Africa;
and the rule of law and justice in prevention
and resolution of conflicts in Africa. Conflict
prevention has been a recurring theme
addressed by the Working Group. In recent
years, the Working Group has served as a
platform for exchanges on cooperation with
the African Union on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.

Further to Security Council resolution 2033
(2012), the Working Group has proved to be
a useful forum for Security Council experts
on Africa to arrive at common positions on
Communiqués adopted jointly with the AU

2021

Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa

 

 

Peace and Security Council, and in finalising
negotiations between these two bodies.

In light of its mandate, the Working Group
is a well positioned body wherein Security
Council experts can consider following up
on recommendations contained in the Joint
Communiqués.

In light of the evolution and strengthening of
the African Peace and Security Architecture,
as well as the growing partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union,
the Working Group is also well positioned
to provide advice to the Security Council on
the basis of the information and analysis it
receives from United Nations and African
Union sources on specific issues on the
Council’s agenda.

UN and Other Partnerships

Since its establishment, the Working
Group has engaged with a broad range of
representatives in the discussion of topics
related to the prevention and resolution of
conflict in Africa, including the UN Secretariat,
Member States, regional and sub-regional
organizations, academic institutions and
civil society organizations. In particular, the
Working Group has engaged closely with
representatives of the African Union.

For more information, the Working Group’s

website can be found at: https://www.un.org/

securitycouncil/subsidiary/africa-ad-hoc-weg.

United Nations Security Council
Working Groups

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 
 

| 2021
FACT SHEETS

 

 

Informal Working Group on International Tribunals

Background

The Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals was established on an informal basis
in 2000 to consider matters relating to the
United Nations and United Nations-assisted
tribunals, in particular the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
and, in recent years, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The current Chair of the Informal Working
Group is the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam, with Kenya serving as Vice-Chair.

Substantive and technical support to the
Informal Working Group is provided by the
Office of Legal Affairs and the Security Council
Affairs Division.

Methods of Work

The Chair of the Informal Working Group
briefs the Security Council on its activities
typically twice a year.

The Informal Working Group holds an
exchange of views with the President and
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism, prior
to their briefings to the Security Council.

Review of the progress of the

work of the Residual Mechanism
Pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010), the
Security Council reviews the progress of the
work of the Residual Mechanism every two
years.

In accordance with subsequent Council
decisions, the Informal Working Group carries
out an examination of the report of the
Residual Mechanism, as well as the report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) on the evaluation of the methods
and work of the Residual Mechanism. The
Informal Working Group then presents its
views and any findings or recommendations
for the Council’s consideration in its review of
the work of the Residual Mechanism.

The most recent review of the progress of
the work of the Residual Mechanism was
concluded in June 2018.
United Nations Security Council
Working Groups

https:/Avww.un.org/securitycouncil/content/
committees-working-groups-and-ad-hoc-bodies

 
